What is joint custody? It’s a situation where parents who have split up keep sharing responsibility for their children’s care. Since each situation is different, the details of joint custody agreements can vary quite a bit.

How joint custody works
In joint custody situations parents work together to raise their children. It involves both where the children live (physical custody) and major decisions about their lives (legal custody).

Joint physical custody

When parents have joint physical custody, the children spend time living with each parent. Ideally, the parents split their time equally, but this doesn't have to be the case. Schooling, parents’ work schedules, and other issues can all affect how much time children spend with each parent.

The schedule should be one that works for everybody. Parents can arrange schedules in a variety of ways, including:

Alternating weeks or months

Weekdays with one parent, and weekends plus holidays with the other

Six months with one parent and six months with the other

Joint legal custody

With joint legal custody both parents get input on major decisions about child-rearing. This can include many things:

Education
Medical care
Mental health care
Extra-curricular activities
Religious upbringing
Parents may have both physical and legal joint custody. It’s also common to have joint legal custody, with one parent getting sole physical custody.

Joint custody vs. shared custody
Joint custody and shared custody are often used interchangeably, but that’s not quite right. Although they’re similar, they’re actually two different things.

Shared custody treats the parents as one unit, much like they were when they were together. It offers flexibility for parents to work out parenting time and make decisions that are in the best interests of the children.

Joint custody treats parents as separate individuals, each with specific responsibilities toward the child. This arrangement is generally less flexible than shared custody. Many of the details will be spelled out in the custody agreement.

Handling joint physical custody
Joint physical custody means the children live with each parent at different times. When possible, parents work out the schedule themselves. When they can’t agree, the courts will make the decision for them.

The parent with the children handles their physical care during that time. This includes everything from bedtime and meals, to getting to school and extracurricular activities on time.

The arrangement usually works best when the parents live near each other. That makes moving between homes less disruptive to the children’s schedules and social lives.

If one parent wants to move away, the custody agreement may need to be revised.

Handling joint legal custody
Since legal custody involves major decisions about the children’s lives, it works best when parents are able to communicate and compromise.

Unless the custody agreement gives responsibility to one parent, both parents need to agree on all decisions and any changes. Joint legal custody agreements often require mediation for issues that the parents can't agree on.

Child custody laws vary by state, but in general they focus on doing what’s best for the child. If you're thinking about asking for joint custody or want to change a custody agreement, you need to know your options. Consider talking with a child custody attorney in your state to find out more.



Florida Child Custody laws have changed. The most important change is the language for child custody. The term now used is "time-sharing". What this really means is that the minor child or children will share time between the parents. The intent of the change in the law is to encourage and foster parents to continue to get along and share their time with the children, rather than one parent having primary custody of the child. When you are considering filing for divorce and researching the divorce laws in Florida, it is important to understand not only how the courts view child custody, but also how that will impact child support and your overall divorce. If you are in a situation where both parents are communicating and in agreement on the raising of your children, this will not pose too much difficulty. However, as is typical in a divorce, the Husband and Wife are not effectively communicating on many levels, so issues related to the children and visitation are sometimes difficult to achieve. Because of these difficulties, it is important to retain a divorce lawyer who understands your point of view and who is willing to advocate on your behalf to accomplish your goals. With the new laws related to time-sharing, Fathers are not necessarily only provided every other weekend and a "dinner night", one evening a week. If the Father can show he is willing and able to spend more time with the children, it is likely the Court will order a time-sharing plan that is similar to a joint custody arrangement. You need to talk to your lawyer about how the different types of time-sharing arrangements can affect the child support that is ordered as well as alimony, equitable distribution and even the marital home. Despite the change in the name in Florida from child custody to time-sharing, all decisions are going to still be based upon what is in the best interest of the child.

Does the grandchild currently live with the grandparent?
If the grandchild currently lives with the grandparent, then the possibility of gaining custody is greatly increased. The grandparent would bring a Petition for Temporary Custody of Minor Child by Extended Family Member. Both of the parents have to be served with this Petition. If one or both of them are in agreement that the grandparent should assume temporary custody, then they can sign an Acceptance of Service indicating that they accept service of the Petition as though a licensed process server had given it to them. Saves the cost of the process server.
Avoiding a court hearing
The next step would be for the parents to sign an Answer and Waiver indicating that they agree with the Petition and wish for the grandparent to have temporary custody. That is the "Answer" part. The "Waiver" part is that the parent does not wish to have any court hearing on the matter and is content to have the judge issue an Order granting the grandparent temporary custody. Some judges will require a hearing anyway, so that they can "look everyone in the eye" and determine for themselves if this arrangement is in the best interests of the child.
How long is "temporary" custody?
Some Petitions specify a specific length of time for the temporary custody, such as "until the parents are released from incarceration." Most Orders specify that the custody by the grandparent remain in place "until further Order of the Court." That means that someone has to ask the Court to change the custody back over to the parent. The parents and grandparent can agree on the reversal, write up the agreement and submit it to the Court with an Order extinguishing the temporary custody--when the time is right.
Can this be accomplished if one or both parents disagree with the grandparent having temporary custody?
If one or both of the parents do not want the grandparent to have temporary custody of the grandchild, then the grandparent must wait for twenty days after the parent is served with the Petition to see if one or both of the parents file an answer. If no Answer is filed by a parent, then the grandparent can request that a default be entered against that particular parent and set the matter before the court for a default hearing. If an Answer is filed, then a hearing is still the next step IF the parties do not attend mediation. Most courts require parties to attend mediation prior to a final hearing. The final hearing is similar to a trial and requires the same preparation.

A few years ago Florida decided that it would no longer decide the issue of primary residential parent (what we have come to understand as primary custody). To that end, the Florida legislature (with input from the family law section of the Florida Bar) enacted law that removes the label "primary residential parent" and "visitation" and has replaced it with the concepts of "time-sharing" and "parenting plans". These concepts are premised on the rationale that parents don't visit with their children rather they share time and we should promote the planning of the new family structure after divorce.

The parenting plan deals with issues of shared parental responsibility (i.e. how you make decisions about issues involving the children - coparenting), pick up and drop off, extra curriclular activities, communication, tax credit, health care, school shedules, religious activities. time-sharing, etc... It seeks to have a written division of the tasks of raising the child together (while apart). The time sharing schedule is just like the old visitation schedule in that it delineates who is spending time with the child and when. The biggest difference with time sharing as to the old visitation schedule is enforcement; thereto, there was no enforcement of visitation (except after the implementation of the gross up method of calculating child support - because credit is given for the extra time spent with the child) but with time-sharing there could be consequences for missing your appointed time with the child (such as decrease in the time, reimbursements for child care or other expenses because the other parent had plans that were interrupted, paying more child support, etc...).

These changes were done in hopes that there would be no more fighting over who would be the "primary residential parent". However, folks now fight over how much time will be spent with the child. Some want more time for child support reasons because more time by the presumed payor meant less money for the payee. Others want more time so that it appears that they are the primary parent. Either way you cut it it's the same game with some new twists. Be careful of how your case turns.

Remember that your kids are not pawns to be played about seeking to obtain an advantage against the other rather they are budding promises of a better tomorrow that should be groomed with nurturing attention and taking care not to ruin the promisng crop.

One of the most important issues in a family law case is the decision the court makes on child custody. For this reason, it can also be one of the most contested issues.

The final decision on child custody has important effects on the future relationship between the child and parents, including decision making, time spent with the child, and the child’s residence. There are two major paths the court can take when deciding a custody issue.

The first is to order a joint, or shared, custody arrangement that splits parental authority and time between the two parents.

The second is for the court to award sole custody, sometimes called full custody, to only one of the parents. Understanding the differences between these two types of custody will be important if you’re involved in a child custody case.

Assigning full custody or joint custody
The overarching standard that the court will use in deciding any child custody decision is what is in the best interest of the child.

Some of the factors the court will consider include the pre-existing relationship between both parents and the child, the current and recent distribution of childcare labor/involvement, the health and stability of both parents, and the ability of each parent to provide a nurturing home for the child.

Once the court has made its decision and decides whether to impose sole or shared custody, the decision cannot be changed unless there is demonstrably changed circumstances relating to the best interest of the child. Examples could include one parent moving far away, being unable to parent for a long term due to injury or illness, or similar circumstance.

Sole, or full custody
When the court grants sole custody to one parent they place the parental decision making power in the hands of one parent, but they do not completely terminate the parental rights of the non-custodial parent. The court will often allow some sort of limited visitation or contact between the child and the non-custodial parent.

In a sole custody arrangement, the child will live with the custodial parent, who will also have decision making authority for the child. Day-to-day decisions, such as what the child eats, what TV programs are watched, which friends are allowed to visit, are up to the custodial parent, as are major decisions, such as religious upbringing.

Often, the non-custodial parent will be unable to object to a parenting decision without showing clear harm to the well-being of the child.

Shared, or joint custody
The courts most commonly divide up custody between the two parents because, for the most part, it is considered to be in the child’s best interests for both parents to have at least some level of involvement in the child’s life.

In a joint custody situation, both parents have some degree of control over the decision making for the child and the child will often divide their time living with both parents. The details of this arrangement will be based on what is in the best interest of the child, and do not have to be a perfect 50-50 split.

Day-to-day decisions are often up to the parent that has actual custody of the child at the time that the decision comes up. No one parent has a stronger claim to major decisions than another, and a custody agreement will usually include a procedure for deciding major decisions collaboratively.

Historically speaking, mothers obtained custody of the children in divorce far more than fathers did. However, today, the traditional roles of mothers and fathers have changed.

Prior to the 1960s, men were typically the breadwinner, while the wife stayed home to take care of the house and raise the children. The average educated male was hard working and employed, while the average female married just outside of high school. The majority of college students were male because many females were planning to get married and stay home, so an education was no use to them.

The male and female roles were very simple back then – the men worked while the women raised the family. A vast majority of jobs were created for men only. If women wanted to work, they would have to assume the traditional female roles, such as being a secretary, nurse or teacher. There just weren’t the same job opportunities for women back then that there are today.

Today’s workforce bares only a slight resemblance to the way it was a generation or two ago. Women are assuming jobs that were only available to men thirty or forty years ago. Women now hold down jobs in the trucking industry, in manufacturing, law enforcement, medicine and law. There are even female firefighters, even though the job is still predominantly held by their male counterparts.

The changes in work-related laws over the years have had a direct impact on the American family. As women are taking on more responsibility outside of the home than ever before, fathers’ roles are changing as well. In fact, it is not uncommon to see the wife and mother supporting the family, while the father stays at home to care for the house and raise the children.

These sweeping changes to the societal and cultural norms have changed the way that Florida courts view child custody and visitation. As so many women are now becoming the sole bread winner, while dad stays at home with the kids, and because many households are dual-income households where both parents share in the rights and responsibilities of raising their kids – the courts are taking notice. Instead of automatically awarding custody to the mother – fathers are now given equal consideration in determining child custody.

Florida courts stand firm on the fact that when they are resolving a child custody dispute, they will always consider what is in the child’s best interests. In addition to the child’s best interests, the courts also take the position that they prefer to have both parents actively involved in the child’s life. This is providing that both parents desire to be involved and that there is no history of domestic violence, drug or alcohol dependency.

It is always best for the parents to come to child custody and visitation agreement on their own, for only they are truly aware of their child’s needs and desires. However, when the parents cannot agree, a judge will have to step in and make the decision for them.

Whenever you are having a child custody dispute, it is extremely important that you hire your own legal representation. An experienced family law attorney will know exactly how to present your case to the judge. The last thing you want to do is show up in court without an attorney. If this happens, your spouse’s lawyer will most likely level you in court.

When you are handling such delicate matters as a child custody dispute, you have to work with an attorney who you can trust. There could be extremely important issues such as child abuse, domestic abuse, drug or alcohol abuse, neglect or verbal abuse that you will need to address with the courts. Only a skilled Tampa divorce lawyer will know how to compile convincing evidence to the judge. Without appropriate measures, a judge might base your case on hearsay and award custody to your spouse instead of you.

Additional resources provided by the author
The Davis Law Group, P.A. is a marital and family law firm serving clients in Tampa and the surrounding areas. Their firm is devoted to providing their clients with outstanding and dedicated legal counsel. They understand how sensitive and volatile divorce and child custody matters are by nature; therefore, they will treat your case as if it was one of their own. Over the years, they have helped their clients reach satisfactory outcomes in family law matters ranging from divorce and child custody to grandparents’ rights, fathers’ rights and everything in between. If you choose to have them represent your case, you can be sure that you will be in the hands of caring, compassionate and skilled legal counsel. Don’t hesitate to contact a Tampa family lawyer from their firm today at (866) 874-7165!

In 2008, the Florida legislature made broad changes in laws associated with custody. One of those changes was to eliminate the words “custody,” “custodial,” “non-custodial parent,” “primary residence,” “primary residential parent,” and “visitation.” Despite this change, the older terms are often used interchangeably with the updated terms, which include “shared parental responsibility,” “sole parental responsibility,” “majority time-sharing,” and “equal time-sharing.” Because the word “custody” has the connotation of possession, or control, it was felt parental responsibility and time-sharing were more accurate descriptions of what actually happens to children when their parents divorce.

 

child custody in floridaStrongly implied in the wording is the idea that bringing up children is a responsibility and parents have a mandate to uphold that responsibility throughout their child’s life. Determination of time-sharing refers to where the child will live. In the state of Florida, the Courts have two options when determining parental responsibilities. Shared parental responsibility can be awarded in which the parents share parenting duties and make decisions together. Sole parental responsibility can be awarded, meaning one parent makes the decisions regarding education, medical issues and religious choices as well as the day-to-day decisions.

 

More from Ayo and Iken

Getting Child Custody and Support

How to Win a Child Custody Case in Florida

Custody and Parenting Plans in a Florida Divorce

Custody Evaluation in Florida

The default in the state of Florida is shared parental responsibility unless the parents are unable to agree on those major decisions, in which case a judge will decide. Ideally, the courts want both parents to be involved in their child’s upbringing and life. Along with the changes in terminology came the necessity of a cohesive parenting plan and time-sharing agreement. Absent any evidence to the contrary, the judge will assume both parents are equally interested in their child’s life. In order for time-sharing agreements to be enforceable, the parenting plan and time-sharing agreement must be extremely detailed.
 

Your Custody Rights vs. the Best Interests of Your Child
 

Video Thumbnail
Both parents may have extremely strong feelings regarding who should be awarded sole parental responsibility. While it is a given that most parents want the best for their child, it can be difficult to put aside the feelings you have for your ex when determining what is in the best interests of your child. Truly focusing on your child’s best interests means all custody and visitation discussions and decisions are made with a goal of ensuring your child’s happiness, emotional and mental health and feelings of security.
 

More from Ayo and Iken

Divorce Mediation in Florida

Custody and Parenting Plans in a Florida Divorce

Orange & Osceola Administrative Orders

Maintaining a close, loving relationship with both parents is generally in the child’s best interests, however the practicality of this type relationship can be challenging. Particularly among parents who had a contentious breakup, putting the past and all those feelings aside in order to truly do what is best for the child can be difficult. Try to remember the choices you and your ex make now will affect your child’s development and your relationship with the child for years and years. While the “best interests” of the child can be difficult to quantify, some factors which may determine best interests include:
 

Physical health of each parent;
Mental health of each parent;
Religious considerations;
Video Thumbnail
Cultural considerations;
If the child is old enough, or mature enough, the wishes of the child;
The support and opportunity for interaction with extended family members;
The need for the continuation of a stable home environment;
For special needs children, the manner in which each parent addresses those needs;
The age and sex of the child;
The ability of the child to adjust to changes in school or community;
The relationship of the child with siblings and other members of the household;
One parent’s excessive discipline of the child;
Emotional abuse directed at the child by one parent;
Any pattern of domestic violence, and
Evidence of parental drug, alcohol or child/sex abuse.
 

What a Judge Will Consider When Deciding on Parental Responsibility
 

florida child custody lawsIf you and your child’s other parent are unable to reach a mutually acceptable arrangement regarding how parental responsibilities will be shared, a Florida judge could step in and make those decisions for you. While one or both parents may believe they are obviously the better parent, a Florida judge is not as likely to distinguish one parent as “good,” and the other as “bad.” The exception to this could be when a parent has made seriously negative life choices. These negative life choices could include the use of drugs or alcohol, incarceration or instances of domestic violence. Even when one of these factors is present, the court may nonetheless believe contact with both parents remains in the best interests of the child. Whenever possible, it is almost always better for parents to put aside their differences and truly work toward the best interests of their child rather than letting a judge make that decision for you. If that is simply not possible, your Florida judge will likely consider the following factors when deciding on parental responsibility:

 

Which parent is more likely to allow the child to have frequent, continuing contact with the other parent;
Which parent has the ability to provide the more stable home environment;
Video Thumbnail
Which parent has the ability to provide necessary items including food, clothing and medical care;
The moral fitness of each parent;
The job security of each parent;
Whether one parent travels frequently for his or her job;
The amount of time the child has been in a stable home environment;
The emotional bond between each parent and the child;
The “proposed” home of each parent after the divorce;
The child’s history, concerning home, school and community;
The extent of each parent’s knowledge of the child’s schedule, likes, dislikes, friends, medical information and school information;
The parenting tasks typically performed by each parent;
The extent parenting responsibilities were and will be conducted by a third party;
The ability of each parent to provide a consistent schedule for the child, and
Any evidence of domestic violence, child abuse or child neglect.
 

The Role of Mediation in a Florida Child Custody Case
 

custody mediation in floridaMediation for parental responsibilities can allow parents to avoid hostile, stressful or traumatic court battles, allowing both parents to reach a common goal of the child’s best interests. In the state of Florida, all cases involving contested custody or visitation matters are referred to mandatory mediation, provided each party has legal representation and no allegations of domestic abuse exist. The goal of mediation is to change a dispute from a “win-lose,” to a “win-win,” situation in a non-adversarial process. Mediation involves a neutral third-party, who has been trained in dispute resolution, who will assist parents in resolving the issues which are causing conflict. Any issues which are not resolved through mediation will be heard by a judge. Everything said during mediation sessions is confidential and may not be repeated to anyone other than the other party or the attorneys for the respective parties. Mediation can give parents more control over the outcome of their parental responsibility issues, and, in most cases, mediated cases resolve much more quickly. There are two primary sources of mediation – private mediators and a court-provided mediator. The cost of a court-provided mediator is based on Florida Statutes and may be provided at a reduced rate for those with a combined annual income of less than $100,000. A Financial Affidavit must be filed with your case in order to establish these fees. The cost of a private mediator is normally more comparable to attorney hourly fees and can span quite a large range. But private mediators tend to be the better choice even though they are much more expensive than court-provided mediators. Private mediators tend to have more time, more expertise, and are more goal oriented. Another distinct benefit to private mediators is the fact that many of them are also family law attorneys. That gives them the experience and knowledge to suggest legally supportable solutions to the parents.  Ayo and Iken can provide you with an experienced attorney, or a Florida Supreme Court Certified Family Law mediator.

 

The mediator will discuss such issues with the parents as:

 

Will the amount of child support be per agreement between the parties or determined by Florida Statute?
What visitation arrangements will be in place?
How much life or health insurance will be provided for the children by the parents?
Which parent will pay for uncovered medical or dental expenses?
Who will make decisions regarding education, health or religious issues?
How will future unexpected costs be shared by the parents?
 

Other than mediation, you could consider Parenting Coordination, which provides a child-focused, alternative dispute resolution process. Parenting Coordination helps the parents create a viable parenting plan and time-sharing agreement. If you are court-ordered to Parenting Coordination, the coordinator may be given approval by the court to make limited decisions.

 

What You Need to Know About a Florida Parenting Plan
 

Florida law requires parents to create a parenting plan which will meet the needs of the individual child. This plan will then be approved by the court. If the parents are unable to create a parenting plan, one will be created by the court. Parental responsibility will be addressed in the parenting plan as well as time-sharing. Whether one parent will have sole parental responsibility and the other will have time-sharing rights or whether the parents will have shared parental responsibility, will be clearly spelled out in the parenting plan. Some parents divide responsibilities, or decide that one parent will have responsibility over specific areas. Unless it is clearly not in the best interests of the child, most Florida courts will prefer a decision of shared parental responsibility. The parenting plan must include, at a minimum, the following:

 

Which parent will be responsible for the health care of the child, or if that responsibility will be shared;
A clear time-sharing plan which details the time the child will spend with each parent;
A written description of how each parent will share the daily tasks of raising the child, including provisions which account for unexpected issues which arise;
Which parent will be primarily responsible for educational decisions, including which parent’s address will be used to determine school district;
How and when pickups and drop-offs will take place;
Which parent will be primarily responsible for extracurricular decisions, and
How each parent will communicate with their child when the child is with the other parent (e-mail, text, telephone, etc).
 

Video Thumbnail
While a parenting plan cannot possibly anticipate every occurrence, it is meant to provide a road map which makes the process of sharing responsibility easier for the parents and the child. The Florida Supreme Court has approved three generic parenting plans which parents can use as a guideline to create their own. The first parenting plan template is applicable to parents who live relatively close to one another. The second is a supervision and safety-focused plan for times when the safety of the child is an issue, and the third addresses unique factors such as a parent relocating or parents who live a significant distance from one another. While many parents strive for a true 50/50 division of parental responsibilities and time-sharing, in reality this rarely works, particularly if the parents do not live very close to one another.
 

When the child goes back and forth during the school week, from one parent’s home to the other, there is a high likelihood that important things (textbooks, backpacks, clothing for school sports) will be at the other parent’s home when needed. Many parents who try a true 50/50 split end up changing to a more workable plan. This could mean one parent has the children from Monday evening through Friday morning, and the other has the children from Friday after school through Monday morning when they go to school. Holidays, birthdays and school vacations are split between the parents.

 

Other Issues Related to the Granting of Sole or Shared Parental Responsibility
 

Some parents wonder whether their decision to remarry will affect their chances for sole parental responsibility. In fact, unless the new spouse could be considered a danger to the child, the new marriage will likely not factor into the decision of parental responsibility at all. The judge will look at both parents, their lifestyles, their mental and physical health, their stability, their ability to provide a stable home life and whether each parent is likely to encourage the children to spend time with the other parent.

 

Video Thumbnail
Other parents wonder whether their political or religious beliefs will become an issue to the decision of parental responsibility. This question is largely dependent on whether the other parent believes those political or religious beliefs are harmful to the child—and whether the judge agrees. Courts are, understandably, hesitant to interfere with a parent’s religious or political views, so whether you are a staunch Republican or a die-hard Democrat, it is unlikely to have any impact on your case.

 

Custody Issues Outside of a Divorce
 

Video Thumbnail
Although most custody issues are in relation to a divorce, there are custody issues associated with paternity, guardianship, juvenile delinquency and termination of parental rights. The award of parental responsibility concerns parental rights, privileges, duties and powers connected to child rearing as well as physical custody of your child, and the court takes this responsibility seriously.


Child custody law in Florida is based on Florida Statutes, prior court decisions, and the general policy and attitudes of the courts. Custody and parenting decisions are based mainly on the “best interests of the child.”  That means the entire custody decision revolves around children’s interests – not parent’s interests.

The statute specifies a list of factors that every judge must consider in a parenting case. Consideration of each factor is mandatory and court orders normally specify facts supporting each factor.   A final custody order normally will show which parent prevailed for each factor.



Here is a list of the custody factors – quoted straight from the statutes:
 

More from Ayo and Iken

How to Win a Child Custody Case in Florida

Getting Child Custody and Support

Custody Evaluation in Florida

Child Custody Jurisdiction in Florida

Custody and Parenting Plans in a Florida Divorce

Sole Custody or Full Custody

(a) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to facilitate and encourage a close and continuing parent-child relationship, to honor the time-sharing schedule, and to be reasonable when changes are required.
(b) The anticipated division of parental responsibilities after the litigation, including the extent to which parental responsibilities will be delegated to third parties.

(c) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to determine, consider, and act upon the needs of the child as opposed to the needs or desires of the parent.

(d) The length of time the child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment and the desirability of maintaining continuity.

(e) The geographic viability of the parenting plan, with special attention paid to the needs of school-age children and the amount of time to be spent traveling to effectuate the parenting plan. This factor does not create a presumption for or against relocation of either parent with a child.

(f) The moral fitness of the parents.

(g) The mental and physical health of the parents.

(h) The home, school, and community record of the child.

(i) The reasonable preference of the child, if the court deems the child to be of sufficient intelligence, understanding, and experience to express a preference.

(j) The demonstrated knowledge, capacity, and disposition of each parent to be informed of the circumstances of the minor child, including, but not limited to, the child’s friends, teachers, medical care providers, daily activities, and favorite things.

(k) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to provide a consistent routine for the child, such as discipline, and daily schedules for homework, meals, and bedtime.

(l) The demonstrated capacity of each parent to communicate with and keep the other parent informed of issues and activities regarding the minor child, and the willingness of each parent to adopt a unified front on all major issues when dealing with the child.

(m) Evidence of domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect, regardless of whether a prior or pending action relating to those issues has been brought. If the court accepts evidence of prior or pending actions regarding domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect, the court must specifically acknowledge in writing that such evidence was considered when evaluating the best interests of the child.

(n) Evidence that either parent has knowingly provided false information to the court regarding any prior or pending action regarding domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect.

(o) The particular parenting tasks customarily performed by each parent and the division of parental responsibilities before the institution of litigation and during the pending litigation, including the extent to which parenting responsibilities were undertaken by third parties.

(p) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to participate and be involved in the child’s school and extracurricular activities.

(q) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to maintain an environment for the child which is free from substance abuse

(r) The capacity and disposition of each parent to protect the child from the ongoing litigation as demonstrated by not discussing the litigation with the child, not sharing documents or electronic media related to the litigation with the child, and refraining from disparaging comments about the other parent to the child.

(s) The developmental stages and needs of the child and the demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to meet the child’s developmental needs.

(t) Any other factor that is relevant to the determination of a specific parenting plan, including the time-sharing schedule.

Our West Palm Beach Child Custody Attorney Is Here to Help
Picture of daughter next to mother and father

By their nature, child custody cases often elicit strong emotions. This may be because parents care deeply about the well-being of their children. Tensions may also be high from a recent or ongoing divorce process. Whatever your circumstances, it is natural to have many questions about child custody, the legal process and what to expect in a child custody dispute. Below, we have compiled a list of frequently asked questions about child custody in Florida for your convenience.

Frequently Asked Questions About Child Custody in Florida
How is custody determined in Florida?
Can the father get child custody?
Do moms always get child custody?
How are custody agreements enforced?
What is time-sharing?
How do I get sole custody in Florida?
How long does a child custody case take in Florida?
What are Florida’s child custody laws for unmarried parents?
What are Florida’s child custody laws about moving out of state?
How do I change a custody agreement in Florida?
Can I get custody if I am not the parent?
Who pays attorney fees in a child custody case?
How Is Custody Determined in Florida?
In Florida, judges determine custody rights based on what will be most beneficial to the child. A joint custody, or shared parental responsibility, ruling is usually favored by default. This ruling is subject to change if the judge finds it to be detrimental to the best interest of the child.

A child’s best interests involve their need for healthy and safe living conditions. It also includes having a parent or parents who put the child’s needs first and are actively involved in their child’s life.

Can the Father Get Child Custody?
The only case in which sex is relevant to a child custody case is when paternity has not been established. Once it is clear who the father is, Florida grants no privileges to either parent based on sex. Instead, courts decide custody rulings based on the best interests of the child.

Do Moms Always Get Child Custody?
No. While an unmarried mother will get legal custody by default, this situation is not set in stone. Florida grants no special privileges to any parents on the basis of sex. Instead, the courts usually rule in favor of shared parental responsibility.

How Are Custody Agreements Enforced?
After agreements have been made about custody and time-sharing, parents must adhere to them by law. When a parent fails or refuses to follow the parenting plan, the other parent may pursue legal action.

You may need to file a targeted motion detailing the violations so it can be remedied. Our West Palm Beach child custody lawyer can help you understand your best options.

What Is Time-Sharing?
If the court rules that both parents will share responsibilities, then the parents must agree to a time-sharing schedule. This schedule includes details of how and when the child’s needs will be met through an outlined plan for the child’s development.

The plan may include how and where the child goes to school, sees a physician, and how much time they spend with each parent. If both parents cannot agree upon a satisfactory time-sharing schedule, then a judge will step in.

How Do I Get Sole Custody in Florida?
Getting sole custody, more accurately termed as “sole parental responsibility.” of a child does not mean that the other parent is completely out of the picture. Sole parental responsibility means that one parent has the responsibility of making big life decisions for the child. The other parent must honor the big picture decisions that the parent with sole parental responsibility makes.

Usually, the court appoints sole parental responsibility to one parent if the other parent is in some way an unfit guardian. A parent may be deemed unfit if they have a history with drug abuse, domestic violence, mental health issues or child abuse or neglect.

How Long Does a Child Custody Case Take in Florida?
The timespan of a child custody, also termed as “parental responsibility”, case in Florida depends on many influencing factors. Disagreement among parents about the time-sharing plan or responsibilities may slow down the case. A lot of time could be spent in court if parents cannot come to a reasonable agreement.

Psychological examinations of the child or testimonies from third parties may also take time. The more complicated or contentious the case, the more time you can expect a child custody case to take.

What Are Florida’s Custody Laws for Unmarried Parents?
If paternity is not recognized in court, an unmarried father has no custody or time-sharing rights. In this case, mothers have full legal custody to children by default. If a DNA test confirms paternity, the unmarried father is granted parental rights and time-sharing rights.

What Are Florida’s Child Custody Laws About Moving Out of State?
If a parent decides to move from Florida to a different state, they must have the decision approved before relocating the child. This can happen a couple of ways. The other parent can approve and the court can sign off on the arrangement. In other cases, the decision is brought before a judge who may find the benefits of a relocation outweigh the costs. Generally speaking, the relocation has to be found in the best interest of the child.

How Do I Change a Custody Agreement in Florida?
After a custody agreement, also termed as “parenting plan” is made, you have the option to file for changes in the agreement. The changes you wish to make must be supported by a change in circumstances. You must show that some relevant situation has changed which warrants the courts’ reconsideration of the agreement. These changes in circumstances do not need to be extreme, but relevant.

Can I Get Custody If I Am Not the Parent?
Generally, the courts favor biological parents for settling custody cases. However, the court may grant custody to non-parents, like grandparents in some situations. This often happens when both parents are deceased, one parent is deceased and the other is unfit, or both parents are unfit. It may also occur when both biological parents give up their custody and parental rights.

Who Pays Attorney Fees in a Child Custody Case?
The judge can decide who will pay for attorney fees based on a few different factors. Financial resources and income will determine who has the ability to pay for what, and who needs help. Other details of the case may also play a part in determining who will pay what fees. A judge may also rule that each party pay their own attorney fees.

Do You Have Further Questions About Child Custody or Time-Sharing?
If your question is not listed here, you can also contact our child custody attorney in West Palm Beach. We can provide you with more information about child custody to help you understand your particular case. You can reach us by phone at 561-655-8844 or fill out our online contact form.

HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO MAKE A DIVORCE FINAL IN FLORIDA?
Between 2 months and 2 years. Many factors account for this wide variation. If a divorce is uncontested by both parties and all runs smoothly, they can expect the divorce to be finalized roughly 2-3 months after the first petition of divorce is filed. A contested divorce, with disputes to resolve, assets to divide, custody to plan, etc will take one year, on average. The length of time involved in a Florida divorce fully depends on whether or not both parties agree on the terms. These are flexible estimations, the accuracy of which depend greatly on the ability of the couple to coordinate and cooperate with each other and their attorneys. Statistics show that on average, a Florida divorce takes 15 months, with a reported range of 7 to 20 months. This is 4 months longer than the national average which sits at 11 months.

Certain mandatory waiting periods may apply, depending on your circumstances. For example, if you and your spouse have not yet lived in Florida for 6 months, you must wait until these 6 months have passed in order to file. If at least one of you has already lived in the state for at least 6 months, you are already meet the residence duration requirement and will not need to wait. Section 61.021, Florida Statutes

THE QUICKEST WAY TO GET DIVORCED IN FLORIDA
Certain couples qualify for what is known as a simplified divorce. This avenue is not available to everyone because the couple must meet specific requirements to qualify. In order to file a petition for simplified divorce, the couple must:

have no minor or dependent children, and the wife must not be pregnant
mutually agree that the marriage cannot be saved
mutually agree about asset division and who is to pay the mutually held debt
neither spouse seeking alimony
both parties waiving the right to a trial and appeal
both parties willing to sign off on the divorce
both parties willing to go to a final hearing
Rule 12.105 Florida Family Law Rules of Procedure and Florida Family Law Rules of Procedure Form 12.901(a) (Petition for Simplified Dissolution of Marriage)

The only waiting periods associated with a simplified divorce are: if applicable, the six-month residency of at least one spouse and the mandatory 20 day waiting period before the hearing for the dissolution of marriage.

All of this criteria must be met, without exception, in order to qualify for a simplified divorce. If the couple does not meet these criteria, they must file a regular petition for divorce in lieu of a simplified one. If you do not meet the criteria for a fast simplified divorce, this does not necessarily mean your divorce will be drawn out and difficult. A divorce may still finish relatively quickly even if it does not meet these criteria. Such divorces are characterized as either "contested divorces" or "uncontested divorces." There is a useful framework to understand these characterizations: contested divorces are complicated, uncontested divorces are simpler, and a simplified divorce is the simplest.

WAITING PERIODS ASSOCIATED WITH UNCONTESTED DIVORCES IN FLORIDA
In an uncontested divorce, both parties are largely in accordance on the terms. The most 'time-consuming' aspect of uncontested divorces is simply arriving at these agreements, ironing out the details, devising a parenting plan and custodial time-sharing schedule, dividing assets and debts, and signing off on said agreements. This discourse - when there are no disputes - usually takes a matter of weeks. There is also a 20 day mandatory waiting period in between filing and the hearing. Section 61.19, Florida Statutes

WAITING PERIODS ASSOCIATED WITH CONTESTED DIVORCES IN FLORIDA
Aside from the mandatory 20-day waiting period, it is very difficult to gauge how long a contested divorce will take. When the couple cannot agree on one or more topics of divorce, there is no telling how long it will take for the contesting parties to relent and find terms they can agree to. This could take a great deal of legal maneuvering and negotiating on a number of topics, possibly including alimony, child support, custody, asset division, shared debt responsibility and more. Contested divorces could take up to two years. In extreme cases, they could take longer. In some cases, even though many topics are contested, both parties are able to come up with agreeable terms within just a few months. It is a very subjective process, depending heavily on each couple's circumstances and dispositions toward the divorce.

DEFAULT DIVORCES IN FLORIDA
Although rare, it is worth mentioning that there is one other avenue to achieve a divorce relatively quickly. In the event that the other spouse is entirely unresponsive to the divorce, essentially ignoring the petition, the petitioning spouse could be granted a default divorce. If the other spouse is served with the petition and does not respond for over 20 days, a default may be entered. The judge may enter a final judgment or schedule a hearing on the default. Rule 12.500 Florida Family Law Rules of Procedure

OTHER FACTORS TO CONSIDER
Although the divorce waiting time does greatly depend on the parties' circumstances, disputes, and personal disposition, one must also bear in mind that the courts may also be extremely busy and this could delay proceedings.

Prior to filing a petition for divorce, which may be contested, each spouse ideally should have already retained a lawyer. The attorney may be familiar with the delays in the local court dockets.

HOW DO I START A DIVORCE IN FLORIDA?
There are some basic requirements that must be met in order to file. The marriage must be irretrievably broken or one must be mentally incapacitated. (The mental incapacity grounds is very limited and very facts specific.)

Section 61.052, Florida Statutes

If the couple does not agree that their marriage is irretrievably broken, the judge will have to make that determination after hearing the evidence. If one of the spouses believes in good faith that the marriage can be saved, the judge may order counseling for the couple. Section 61.052(2), Florida Statutes

The recommended first step to commence a divorce in Florida is to retain an experienced Florida divorce attorney. It will hugely simplify the process for you when you obtain a lawyer; they can demystify the legal process, advise the best course of action in your case and walk you through the divorce step by step, so as to eliminate any potential confusion. Once you have your Florida divorce lawyer at your side, you will then spend time consulting with them and beginning to gather relevant information and evidence to be used in the divorce proceedings. This is not a formalized process within the courts but is considered to be a 'best practice' when going about a divorce. You will want your attorney to pry into every relevant detail so they can better devise a strategy for your case, especially in cases of contested divorce.

The divorce officially begins when a Petition for Dissolution of Marriage is filed. The petition will need to be notarized and you will keep a signed copy. There is $408 filing, plus a $10 summons fee, per defendant. This form allows you to make claims pertaining to alimony, assets, child custody/support and debts. The form must be filed in the correct circuit and county in which you currently reside. A process server will then deliver the papers to the other spouse. If you have children, the state of Florida requires you and your spouse to attend a seminar on children and divorce. You may attend separately.

You are required under Florida law to provide your spouse with a completed and signed financial affidavit within 45 days of filing your petition for dissolution of marriage. You must disclose:

income
bank statements
tax returns
assets
credit card statements
personal financial statements
debts
any other pertinent financial documentation
RULE 12.285 FLORIDA FAMILY LAW RULES OF PROCEDURE
HOW MUCH WILL A DIVORCE COST IN FLORIDA?
Every divorce case is different, with some cases being resolved in a matter of weeks and some taking several years. For example, if there is little to no argument over legal issues such as child custody, child support, or assets, then a divorce may cost as little as $900.00.  The costs and fees will increase in cases where the parties litigate issues such as those just mentioned.  Attorneys generally bill on an hourly basis, so longer divorces will naturally accrue more attorney fees while objective costs like the $408 filing fee are uniform between divorces. There is a wide fluctuation in attorney fees, depending on their experience and skill. You will want to meticulously review the attorney you ultimately hire and remember that ultimately, they are working for you.

There are a number of costs and fees associated with divorce in the state of Florida. There may be certain costs specific to the county and jurisdiction in which you file. Other than filing and attorney fees, there may be additional costs for consultants, appraisers, mediators, financial analysts and child custody evaluators. Miscellaneous expenses may build, such as the cost of processing documents, notarizing a document, making copies of large documents, making copies of public records and more.

Child custody disputes tend to be the most costly aspect of Florida divorce cases, costing much more than divorces without child custody disputes. When a divorce goes to trial it becomes more expensive because the attorney must prepare pre-trial motions, trial briefs, discovery, testimony and more, in addition to time spent physically in court.Property division and alimony issues are also often expensive issues.

The costs of divorce proceedings must be differentiated from the expenses each party could incur after divorce. There may be alimony payments and child support, which arguably contribute to the total cost of divorce. Although Florida is a no-fault divorce state, fault with regard to abuse and infidelity may be considered when determining alimony, parental responsibility, and asset division, which could also affect the total cost of divorce.

Preparing a realistic divorce budget is an excellent idea.  Contact us for help with preparing a divorce budget, with no obligation from us.  We will help you plan for expenses that will occur as well as post-divorce income and expenses.  

CAN MY HUSBAND/WIFE FIGHT THE DIVORCE IN FLORIDA?
Your husband or wife has the right to refuse or contest a divorce. This does mean that a divorce becomes impossible, merely that the easier option of uncontested divorce is off the table. An uncontested divorce is filed and agreed upon by both spouses., but if this method is not available, you have the option of filing a contested divorce on your own. The papers will be delivered to the contesting spouse and they will have 20 days to answer your petition. The judge may require marital counseling if your spouse believes in good faith that the marriage can be saved. If the spouse has answered the petition and any applicable counseling has failed, a contested divorce will move forward.

Ultimately, if your marriage is irretrievably broken, no one can deny you from getting a divorce. (You may fail because you did not follow the proper legal procedure in some way, in which case you would have to start over.) If your spouse does not want a divorce, the most they can do is complicate and prolong the process.

HOW DOES A MUTUAL DIVORCE WORK IN FLORIDA?
When both parties agree to the divorce, including terms of child custody, alimony, and asset division, this is called a mutual divorce. Mutual divorces are far simpler and far less expensive than contested divorces. It may occur in one of two ways: simplified divorce or uncontested divorce. The spouses may qualify for a 'simplified divorce' if they have no children, are not seeking alimony, and agree on all aspects of asset and debt division. It is for all intents and purposes, a simple in and out procedure. If there are children and/or alimony is sought, then the spouses will file for an uncontested divorce.

In an uncontested divorce, all issues are settled and agreed upon, with little to nothing in dispute between the two parties. Both parties are willing to sign in an uncontested divorce. The process of uncontested divorce in Florida is fairly simple and easy by comparison with a contested divorce. It goes as follows:

PRE DIVORCE DISCUSSIONS
Before a petition for dissolution of marriage is ever drafted, the couple will need to come to an agreement about the requirements of uncontested divorce. During this discourse, both spouses would mutually agree to seek a divorce, agree on the division of their assets (cars, homes, land, bank accounts) and make a tentative agreement about the division of parental responsibility. This may be done with or without the aid of legal counsel. If there are any disputes, however simple or good-natured, the couple does not yet meet the requirements of an uncontested divorce. All factors must be resolved with absolutely nothing hanging in the air in order for a divorce to be filed as an uncontested divorce.

PREPARING NECESSARY PAPERWORK
With the aid of their respective attorneys, the spouses will need to file the necessary paperwork. This includes a perfectly drafted petition for dissolution of marriage. One spouse will be the petitioner and the other will be the respondent. The respondent will file their answer with the court, agreeing that the marriage cannot be salvaged and separation is sought by both parties. A hearing will then be scheduled. The divorcing couple can prepare a marital settlement agreement for the judge with the advice of their attorneys. This is a contract between the spouses outlining all the terms of their divorce. This agreement should be fair to both spouses and reviewed by their respective attorneys prior to signing. It is not a required document but is fairly standard, and helpful in completing required divorce paperwork. If there are children, the parents will also need to submit a carefully drafted parenting plan explaining how they will divide parental responsibility and time with each minor child, including child support agreements. A common problem that arises for a couple during an uncontested divorce is when the agreed upon child support amount falls below state guidelines.

THE DIVORCE HEARING
The number of hearings involved in your divorce will depend on the specifics of your case. In the initial hearing, for example, a judge may require you and your spouse to seek counseling (this is mandatory in some Florida counties, and more likely if you have children.) Contested divorces are more likely to have additional hearings than uncontested divorces. When all is settled, sorted and agreed upon between you, your spouse and the judge, a final hearing will be scheduled where the judge will make a final judgment about the dissolution of your marriage.

WHAT IS A LEGAL SEPARATION?
Legal separation is court-sanctioned process recognized in many states that allows a couple to legally formalize their separation while still being married. In some cases, it is a precursor to divorce, although couples do sometimes reconcile after a legal separation, without having to get remarried. Legal separation does not exist in Florida law. Florida is one of six states that do not recognize legal separation. A couple may enter into a separation on their own terms at any time without notifying the court or filing any paperwork, but Florida courts would not formally recognize it or resolve disputes related to it. There are, however, a handful of state laws that can benefit separated couples in Florida. The separated spouses may be granted some of the features of a divorce during their physical separation, absent an actual divorce. A separated couple will be able to create a legally binding marital separation agreement, and certain statutes permit litigation for spousal or child support.

In cases with children, a separated couple will still be able to pursue child support, parental time-sharing agreements (custody), a division of property and assets and alimony, if applicable. In the event that one spouse moves out without filing for divorce, the other spouse can petition for child support and/or alimony. This is called a Petition for Support Disconnected with Dissolution of Marriage because it is unrelated to the Petition for Dissolution of Marriage filed in divorce cases. It is, therefore, possible to get child support without a divorce in Florida. Section 61.09, Florida Statutes

BENEFITS OF LEGAL SEPARATION
For some couples, a legal separation is preferable to an out and out divorce for variant reasons. Spouses who are the same health insurance plan may be reluctant to divorce and leave one of the two without coverage. In the case of military spouses, there are a number of benefits which married couples receive and they may be similarly reluctant to forfeit these benefits by way of a divorce. In addition, legally separated couples can still file taxes together, while divorced couples who did not remarry will have to file as single. If the couple is still unsure as to whether or not divorce is necessary, a legal separation may give them the time necessary to decide. Some couples also may factor their religion in when weighing the concept of divorce.

It should be noted that any decision made in a separation will not be legally binding if either party should ultimately choose to file for divorce. If a couple mutually agrees to file for divorce, the court will reevaluate the terms and circumstances of the case, without regard to any agreement reached in separation hearings. 

WHAT HAPPENS TO MY RETIREMENT FUNDS IN A DIVORCE?
Any portion of the retirement funds that were accrued during the marriage will be redistributed between you and your soon-to-be former spouse. The law states that all "benefits, rights, and funds accrued during the marriage in retirement, pension, profit-sharing, annuity, deferred compensation, and insurance plans and programs are marital assets subject to equitable distribution." Section 61.076, Florida Statutes

If one of the spouses was a member in the armed services for during at least ten years of their marriage, then the retired or retainer pay will be distributed between both spouses. The court will specify the exact amount to be distributed to each party. The frequency of payments is not to exceed a monthly basis.

HOW ARE ASSETS DIVIDED IN A DIVORCE IN FLORIDA?
As an "equitable distribution" state, Florida divides property acquired during the marriage in a fair and evenhanded manner. This may not necessarily be a 50/50 split, seeing assets are not always divisible 'down the middle.' However, the court intends to have each spouse leave the marriage with a similar share of assets. Some property or other assets acquired by a spouse prior to marriage are theirs to keep; they may be untouched by divorce proceedings. The court may find "justification for an unequal distribution based on all relevant factors. These include

(a) The contribution to the marriage by each spouse, including contributions to the care and education of the children and services as homemaker.

(b) The economic circumstances of the parties.

(c) The duration of the marriage.

(d) Any interruption of personal careers or educational opportunities of either party.

(e) The contribution of one spouse to the personal career or educational opportunity of the other spouse.

(f) The desirability of retaining any asset, including an interest in a business, corporation, or professional practice, intact and free from any claim or interference by the other party.

(g) The contribution of each spouse to the acquisition, enhancement, and production of income or the improvement of, or the incurring of liabilities to, both the marital assets and the nonmarital assets of the parties.

(h) The desirability of retaining the marital home as a residence for any dependent child of the marriage

(i) The intentional dissipation, waste, depletion, or destruction of marital assets after the filing of the petition or within 2 years prior to the filing of the petition.

(j) Any other factors necessary to do equity and justice between the parties.

For the purposes of equitable distribution, the court may award one spouse with a cash payment to be paid by the other spouse. This obligation would not terminate upon potential remarriage or death of either spouse. It would remain a debt owed by one spouse's estate to the other spouse's estate.

If disputes about asset division arise, then all distribution of marital assets must be supported by factual findings and substantial evidence pertaining to the following:

(a) Clear identification of nonmarital assets and ownership interests;

(b) Identification of marital assets, including the individual valuation of significant assets, and designation of which spouse shall be entitled to each asset;

(c) Identification of the marital liabilities and designation of which spouse shall be responsible for each liability;

(d) Any other findings necessary to advise the parties or the reviewing court of the trial court's rationale for the distribution of marital assets and allocation of liabilities.

Section 61.075, Florida Statutes

Bear in mind, if an asset was acquired by one spouse individually but during the course of the marriage, it is still fair game for asset division. Additionally, if an asset was acquired before the marriage, but enhanced in value due to the efforts of the other spouse in some way, the value of the enhancement becomes an attributable asset. Gifts given by one spouse to another during the marriage are still considered joint marital property. As mentioned, all "benefits, rights, and funds accrued during the marriage in retirement, pension, profit-sharing, annuity, deferred compensation, and insurance plans" acquired during the marriage are divisible assets.

When determining the value of assets and liabilities, the time of appraisal is significant. Therefore, the cut off date for evaluating all assets and liabilities is generally the day the couple enters into a valid separation agreement.

The equitable distribution of marital assets will be provided for without regard for alimony payments. Alimony is to be determined after asset division. Section 61.075(9), Florida Statutes

In some cases, the court may not pursue equitable distribution in the form of asset division, but could potentially "order a monetary payment in a lump sum or in installments paid over a fixed period of time." This could also be done to supplement equitable distribution if the assets division does not provide for an entirely equitable distribution by default. Section 61.075(10), Florida Statutes

WILL DIVORCE HURT MY CREDIT?
While filing for divorce will have no direct effect on your credit score (creditworthiness and marital status are in not directly related), there are certain consequences of divorce which could ultimately take a toll on your score. For example, if you and your ex-spouse jointly acquired a debt during the marriage (credit lines, mortgage, etc), the judge will evenly divide this liability between the two of you in the same manner that assets are divided. If your spouse fails to make their payments, your credit score will take a hit. The nonpayment can be reported to the court.

Another indirect way that divorce can take a toll on credit is the financial burden of obtaining a divorce. Divorces can easily cost thousands of dollars. This financial strain may render you unable to handle your bills.

In addition, the loss of your spouse's income may result in financial hardship, as you were used to functioning on two incomes and will now function on only your own. For this reason, you may not be able to pay all credit card bills in a timely manner.

Your divorce could also hurt your credit if your spouse is an authorized user on your accounts and vindictively chooses to spend a great deal on one or more of your cards. As an authorized user, they can harm your credit score.

The best course of action you can take to protect your credit before, during and after a divorce is to remove your spouse as an authorized user on all of your accounts, have open and honest discussion about the need to pay jointly held debts, and try as best you can to budget for the loss of your spouse's income.

WHAT ASSETS ARE NOT INCLUDED IN A DIVORCE?
Non-marital assets and liabilities include:

1. Assets acquired and liabilities incurred by either party prior to the marriage, and assets acquired and liabilities incurred in exchange for such assets and liabilities;

2. Assets acquired separately by either party by noninterspousal gift, bequest, devise, or descent, and assets acquired in exchange for such assets;

3. All income derived from nonmarital assets during the marriage unless the income was treated, used, or relied upon by the parties as a marital asset;

4. Assets and liabilities excluded from marital assets and liabilities by valid written agreement of the parties, and assets acquired and liabilities incurred in exchange for such assets and liabilities; and

5. Any liability incurred by forgery or unauthorized signature of one spouse signing the name of the other spouse. Any such liability shall be a nonmarital liability only of the party having committed the forgery or having affixed the unauthorized signature.

Section 61.075(6)(b), Florida Statutes

CAN ASSETS BE HIDDEN IN A DIVORCE IN FLORIDA?
In any state, including Florida, hiding assets is illegal, reckless and frowned upon. If the court finds that assets have been hidden, they may not honor the principle of equitable distribution and reward more to the spouse from whom assets were hidden. This can happen in the form of hiding cash, jewels, bank account information, documentation of property and more, and is more common among high net worth clients. The practice of hiding assets is in direct violation of the required disclosure of assets and finances. The spouse who is not hiding assets is tasked with exposing the spouse who is hiding assets. Ultimately it is that spouse's attorney who will have to implement various discovery tactics when assets have dishonestly been hidden. These include demand for production of financial documents, deposition, subpoenas, and interrogatories. The spouse who hid assets would be responsible for these investigative legal fees; they would also see any pre or postnuptial agreements voided. They may also face fines, jail time and perjury charges.

HOW MUCH ALIMONY WILL I RECEIVE?
Alimony is court-ordered financial support paid by one spouse to the other, to help ease the financial consequences of a divorce in all areas. The amount and duration of alimony will depend on the length of the marriage. The court also takes into account the age, health, and standards of living of each spouse. The employment prospects of the financially weaker spouse, income disparity, domestic violence history, the standard of living, inheritance and child support payments are also all taken into account when calculating alimony. It is paid by the primary breadwinner and awarded to the other spouse.

There are generally four types of alimony: Bridge-the-gap, rehabilitative, durational and permanent. Bridge-the-gap alimony is given when the divorce is not yet complete and ends when the divorce is finalized - it is not to exceed 2 years. Rehabilitative alimony requires the recipient, unemployed spouse to create an outline of their living and educational expenses. If the unemployed spouse is not actively seeking employment in good faith, alimony will stop. Durational alimony is a relatively new legal development which allows a recipient spouse who did not qualify for stable alimony to receive it for at least a specified, short duration. Permanent alimony is paid until the recipient spouse dies or gets remarried. Section 61.08, Florida Statutes. Most of the "legal" factors are set forth in Section 61.08, Florida Statutes.

Alimony may be modified if the supporting spouse becomes ill, the recipient spouse retires or there is a significant change in the income of the supporting spouse.

Sections 61.08(6), (7), and (8), Florida Statutes

HOW MUCH ALIMONY WILL I HAVE TO PAY?
When calculating the amount of alimony you will be paying, you will factor in the net income of your ex-spouse, your net income, the duration of the marriage and the age of your supported spouse. There is no uniform answer to the question of "how much alimony will I pay in Florida" because it depends entirely on these subjective factors. It is calculated based on need and ability to pay. Most of the "legal" factors are set forth in Section 61.08, Florida Statutes.

HOW LONG DO I HAVE TO LIVE IN FLORIDA TO GET A DIVORCE IN FLORIDA?
Either you or your spouse must have resided in the state of Florida for at least six months in order to file for divorce in the state, however, this requirement is flexible. You can establish residency with the court by showing that you were physically in the state of Florida for the required duration or that you intended to make Florida your primary residence during that time. To establish a 6-month physical presence, you do not need to have entirely refrained from travel during that six-month time frame. Showing evidence of permanent employment, a lease or deed, Florida address, Florida driver's license and taxes filed in the state of Florida can help establish a six-month residency. Sections 61.021, and 61.052(2) Florida Statutes

WHAT IS MEDIATION IN A DIVORCE OR CUSTODY CASE?
Mediation is an alternative to formal litigation, which allows both parties to come to an agreement about divorce or custody disputes. It is not an alternative for obtaining a divorce, seeing as the court is still needed to finalize marriage dissolution. Rather, it is used exclusively to resolve disputes. Mediation is arguably preferable to formal litigation simply because it is a more relaxed, less formal process with far less paperwork and requirements. It is also less egregiously expensive than formal litigation.

The aim of mediation is to create solutions and resolve disputes quickly and in an informal fashion, with a simple discussion, compromise and agreement. The discussions that take place during mediation are private and confidential, not to be recorded as they are in a formal courtroom setting. In some cases, mediation is court ordered. If disputes have arisen over how time will be shared with a child or how assets will be divided, for example, then these issues can be proactively discussed and presented during mediation.

Section 61.183, Florida Statutes

WILL I GET CUSTODY OF MY CHILD(REN)?
Any parent fighting for custody of a child in Florida MUST know this: it is almost impossible to get "sole custody" of a child in the state of Florida. Florida courts will hardly ever completely deny one parent the right to see or make decisions regarding their child, therefore they will not grant one parent the exclusive right to spend time with and make decisions about the child (i.e. sole custody).

In fact, the terms "sole custody" and "visitation" have been done away within the state, replaced with the terms "parental responsibility" and "time-sharing." Parental responsibility refers to a parent's right to make major and minor decisions about their child's life and upbringing, such as school choice, doctor's appointments or medical procedures. Shared parental responsibility requires each parent to inform the other of major decisions regarding the child, as they happen. Time-sharing is simply the time spent with the child; this is shared between the two parents.

The closest solution for a parent seeking 'sole custody' of a child in Florida is to be granted sole parental responsibility (evidence may be needed to show that the other parent is not making decisions in the child's best interest) and limited time-sharing with the other parent. The parent with sole parental responsibility would be allowed to make all decisions regarding their child without the advice, consultation or permission of the other parent. However, the other parent would still be allowed to see and have a relationship with the child, including the possibility of overnight visits. The court deploys common sense in making this call, and under extenuating circumstances could suspend the time-sharing right until the other parent meets certain conditions, such as passing a mental health evaluation or completing rehabilitation of some sort.

Every judge has their own specific inclinations toward time-sharing and parental responsibility. In establishing parental responsibility and creating a time-sharing schedule, the best interest of the child is the chief consideration. Therefore the court will evaluate a number of factors when determining the allocation of parental responsibility and time with the child. These factors include but are not limited to:

the ability and willingness of each parent to develop a close and continuing parent-child relationship
the ability and willingness of each parent to act upon the child's needs in lieu of their own personal needs
the amount of time a child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment and desirability of maintaining stability for the child
the geographic viability of splitting the child's time between each parent, with special attention paid to the child's schooling and travel time
the moral, mental and physical health of each parent
the preference of the child
the ability of each parent to keep the other parent informed as to the decisions and circumstances of the child
the ability of each parent to provide a consistent routine for the child, and stay informed as to aspects of the child's life including friends, teachers, favorite things and daily activities
evidence of domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect, as well as evidence of either parent attempting to falsify information with regard to these issues
the division of parenting tasks and responsibilities prior to litigation, including responsibilities designated to third parties
the needs of the child in accordance with their developmental stage
the ability of each parent to shield the child from ongoing litigation by not sharing documents with the child or making disparaging comments about the other parent
the ability of the parent to maintain a substance-abuse-free environment for the child
See Section 61.13(3)(b), Florida Statutes

WHAT MAKES A PARENT UNFIT IN FLORIDA?
To make the determination that a parent is unfit in Florida, the court must find that the parent has neglected, abandoned or abused the child.

Abandonment is legally defined as the failure of an able parent to ensure their child is supported and looked after, or the failure to "maintain a substantial and positive relationship" with the child. A substantial and positive relationship is defined as frequent and regular contact, communication and the exercising of parental rights and responsibilities. “Token” visits with the child and generally minimal efforts usually do not constitute a substantial and positive relationship.” A parent's incarceration may support a finding of abandonment. Section 39.01, Florida Statutes

Abuse is any action or threatened action that would result in physical, mental, or sexual injury or harm to the child that could impair the child physical or emotional health. Florida has a very broad definition of harm. Abuse includes many incidents including (among others) willful acts that produce the following specific injuries: Section 39.01, Florida Statutes

Sprains, dislocations, or cartilage damage
Bone or skull fractures
Brain or spinal cord damage
Intracranial hemorrhage or injury to other internal organs
Asphyxiation, suffocation, or drowning
Injury resulting from the use of a deadly weapon
Burns or scalding
Cuts, lacerations, punctures, or bites
Permanent or temporary disfigurement
Permanent or temporary loss or impairment of a body part or function
Spanking, (Corporal discipline) does not constitute abuse unless it results in harm or injury to the child.

Exposing a child to substance or alcohol abuse may also fall under the umbrella of abuse. Such exposure could be established by a test of the child's blood or urine at the time of birth to detect any amount of a controlled substance. Alternatively, this could be established by a finding of extensive, abusive and chronic use of a substance with a demonstrated negative effect on the child's well-being.

Neglect occurs when a financially able parent fails to provide adequate food, clothing, shelter or healthcare or allows the child to live in a harmful environment.

If parents do not wish to seek out certain medical treatments due to recognized religious beliefs, that, alone, will not result in a finding of neglect, however, their refusal may still be reported to and investigated by the Department of Children and Family Services. Section 39.01, Florida Statutes

CAN A NON-PARENT WIN CUSTODY OF A CHILD IN FLORIDA?
First and foremost, in matters of custody, Florida law favors the biological parent - promoting the ideal that a child's care ought to be the responsibility of their biological mother and/or father. Unless circumstances do not permit, the court will persist in this goal. However, under extenuating circumstances, parents may be forced to relinquish custody of the child and surrender it to a non-parent. This would occur on a case by case basis. There are a few viable paths to this outcome.

Generally, granting custody to a third party non-parent only becomes a possibility when:

one parent is deceased and the living parent is unfit
both parents are alive but both are unfit
both parents have voluntarily relinquished custody of the children with a termination of parental rights
the child has been living with the non-parent third party for a considerable amount of time
The method with the least opportunity for dispute involves the biological parents voluntarily agree, in which case a non-parent could be granted parental rights and custody of the child. Section 39.806(1)(a), Florida Statutes

If the state has reason to believe a parent is unfit, for the reasons specified in the above section, the Florida Department of Children and Families may launch an investigation of the allegations. If the investigators pursue legal action, the law requires efforts to reunify the child. In the meantime, the Court will usually assign temporal parental rights to the other parent, if appropriate. If both are found to have abused, neglected or abandoned the child, the child may be removed from their biological parents' care and placed in relative or state custody pending the rehabilitation. The specifics are in Chapter 39, Florida Statutes. Generally, an attorney will be appointed for a parent or parents who can not afford attorneys.

Alternatively, if a family member believes the child is in harm's way while in the custody of his or her biological parents, they may file a third-party petition for concurrent or temporary custody. The parents may consent or fight the petition for concurrent or temporary custody, If the parents contest the petition, the family member must prove to the court that the child is not being adequately cared for, and the biological parents are unfit to hold custody. See Section 751.03, Florida Statutes

CAN ONE PARENT MOVE OUT OF STATE AND STILL HAVE JOINT-CUSTODY?
Work, family, and number of other factors may require a parent to move out of Florida. If the move happens before an initial time sharing agreement or court order, the parents' locations will be considered in scheduling the time sharing, travel, costs, etc.

In Florida, after the initial time sharing is set, any move of more than 50 miles in distance and 60 days in duration constitutes a "relocation," whether it is out of state or in the state. When one parent wishes to relocate and maintain child access and time-sharing, both parents must sign an agreement to specify the terms of the new time-sharing schedule and transportation arrangements or a court must decide those issues. If both parents agree to those terms, the signed agreement will be filed with the court and ideally will be ratified without having a hearing. Section 61.13001, Florida Statutes

If the parents cannot reach an agreement, the relocating parent must serve a Petition to Relocate on the other parent, specifying:

address and contact information for the proposed new residence
date of relocation
reasons for the relocation, including a copy of a job offer letter, if applicable
proposed time-sharing schedule after relocation
proposed transportation arrangements
The non-relocating parent has 20 days to respond to the petition, otherwise, the court may grant the request to relocate and approve the proposed time sharing and other issues. If the non-relocating parent objects to the proposed plan, they must respond to the petition, citing reasons why the move should not occur, and other factors.

The relocating parent must provide satisfactory proof to the court that the proposed move is in the child's best interest. The court will weigh many factors when deciding whether to approve the planned relocation, these factors include: Section 61.13001(7), Florida Statutes

the child's age
relationship with relocating and non-relocating parent
the child's preference, if any
the feasibility of maintaining a relationship with the non-relocating parent
the financial necessity of the relocation
cost and logistics of time-sharing between the two parents
the impact, if any, the move may have on the child's development
any history of domestic violence or substance abuse on the part of either parent
A parent who relocates without the consent of the other parent or legal approval may be held in contempt of the court. An unapproved relocation with a child who is in joint custody may be held against the relocating parent, as the judge may order the parent to return the child, pay the other parent's legal fees, impose penalties or modify the time-sharing plan in favor of the other parent.

CAN I SUPERVISE VISITATIONS?
Because Florida courts will rarely terminate visitation/time-sharing entirely, sometimes supervised time sharing may be the best course of action available. Unless the parents voluntarily agree to supervision by the other parent or another agreed-upon party in a time-sharing agreement, time sharing may be supervised in a formal, court-ordered setting by a third party,

Generally speaking, supervised visitation has limited appropriate uses. Unless the child's well-being is threatened by being alone with the parent unsupervised, the court will not find a reason to mandate supervised visitation.

Although Florida law shies away from the term 'visitation,' there are a number of supervised visitation programs available in the state of Florida which allow a third party to oversee visits between parent and child. Florida currently has 43 visitation programs with 47 sites. The majority of families enrolled in supervised visitation programs were ordered by the court to do so. In order to create a tension-free environment for the child, the court leans towards impartial supervisors (rather than the other parent or highly partisan relatives) who have the best interest of the child in mind, above all.

Generally, the supervised parent and the impartial supervisor must adhere to certain ground rules. These ground rules depend on the circumstances of the case and the reasons that made supervision necessary. They will be set forth in the supervised time-sharing agreements or orders.

HOW DO I ENFORCE MY VISITATION RIGHTS IN FLORIDA?
Generally, parents are free to set up a time-sharing (visitation) schedule that best suits the dynamic of their family. Their schedule should be submitted to the court for review and approval. A finalized divorce decree (based upon the parents' agreement or upon a contested hearing) will detail the time-sharing rights each parent is entitled to. If one parent is not abiding by the agreement and interfering with visitation rights, the other parent may file an emergency motion to enforce or motion for contempt with the court.

A motion to enforce is the less combative option; it simply asks the court to enforce the parenting plan.

A motion of contempt asks the court to penalize the parent who is not complying with the schedule.

NOTE: the failure to pay child support is not grounds for denying another parent's visitation rights, nor can a support paying parent withhold child support to penalize the other parent for denying them visitation.

DO GRANDPARENTS HAVE VISITATION RIGHTS IN FLORIDA?
Unless the surviving parents agree, grandparents do not have visitation rights in Florida, unless very unusual fact exist. Generally, grandparental rights are limited to cases in which the child(ren) has been determined to be dependent or in adoption proceedings. At best, grandparent visitation rights are extremely difficult to obtain - even more so when one or both parents object to the grandparent visiting the child. This does not mean that it is impossible for a grandparent to see their grandchild in the event of their parents' divorce, however, they do not benefit from any enforceable legal right to see their grandchild. If the parents and grandparents come to a mutual agreement as to grandparent visitation, then the grandparent may see and spend time with their grandchild without issue.

So long as at least one parent is alive, functioning as a fit parent, a grandparent has no visitation rights to exercise. A grandparent who believes that a parent is unfit and the child's safety is jeopardized in that parent's care may petition the court for visitation rights. They have the burden of proving the parent in question is unfit, and if they do not meet their burden they may have to compensate the parent's legal fees. If the parent is proven unfit, a guardian may be appointed to protect the child's best interest. The grandparent may, in turn, be granted visitation rights if:

An unfit parent poses harm to the child's well-being
Grandparent visitation is in the minor child's best interest AND
The parent's relationship with their child will not be harmed or threatened by grandparent visitation                     
Any legal action on the part of grandparent seeking visitation may only be filed once every 2 years at maximum. If the extenuating circumstances permit grandparent visitation, it could be terminated at any time if the court finds that the situation has changed and grandparent visitation is no longer in the child's best interest.

This stringent legal disposition toward grandparent rights in Florida is relatively newfound. Prior to 2015, a grandparent could file for visitation rights if the parent's marriage had been dissolved, the child had been born out of wedlock to parents who never intended to marry or the parent had abandoned or deserted the child. In fact, before the year 2000, grandparents could seek legal recourse if married parents used their parental authority to prohibit contact between a grandparent and minor child. The current legal disposition toward grandparent rights is worlds away from that which Florida held in the past.

WHAT FACTORS DOES THE JUDGE USE TO DECIDE WHO GETS CUSTODY?
Section 61.13(3)

It is extremely important to remember that in a parent separation case, Florida Courts no longer award custody. They establish parenting plans which include time-sharing schedules. Only in very few extraordinary cases will Florida Courts grant 'custody.' For purposes of establishing or modifying a parenting plan, including a time-sharing schedule, the best interest of the child shall be the primary consideration. Determination of the best interests of the child shall be made by evaluating all of the factors affecting the welfare and interests of the particular minor child and the circumstances of that family, including, but not limited to:

(a) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to facilitate and encourage a close and continuing parent-child relationship, to honor the time-sharing schedule, and to be reasonable when changes are required.

(b) The anticipated division of parental responsibilities after the litigation, including the extent to which parental responsibilities will be delegated to third parties.

(c) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to determine, consider, and act upon the needs of the child as opposed to the needs or desires of the parent.

(d) The length of time the child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment and the desirability of maintaining continuity.

(e) The geographic viability of the parenting plan, with special attention paid to the needs of school-age children and the amount of time to be spent traveling to effectuate the parenting plan. This factor does not create a presumption for or against relocation of either parent with a child.

(f) The moral fitness of the parents.(g) The mental and physical health of the parents.

(h) The home, school, and community record of the child.

(i) The reasonable preference of the child, if the court deems the child to be of sufficient intelligence, understanding, and experience to express a preference.

(j) The demonstrated knowledge, capacity, and disposition of each parent to be informed of the circumstances of the minor child, including, but not limited to, the child's friends, teachers, medical care providers, daily activities, and favorite things.

(k) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to provide a consistent routine for the child, such as discipline, and daily schedules for homework, meals, and bedtime.

(l) The demonstrated capacity of each parent to communicate with and keep the other parent informed of issues and activities regarding the minor child, and the willingness of each parent to adopt a unified front on all major issues when dealing with the child.

(m) Evidence of domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect, regardless of whether a prior or pending action relating to those issues has been brought. If the court accepts evidence of prior or pending actions regarding domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect, the court must specifically acknowledge in writing that such evidence was considered when evaluating the best interests of the child.

(n) Evidence that either parent has knowingly provided false information to the court regarding any prior or pending action regarding domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect.

(o) The particular parenting tasks customarily performed by each parent and the division of parental responsibilities before the institution of litigation and during the pending litigation, including the extent to which parenting responsibilities were undertaken by third parties.

(p) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to participate and be involved in the child's school and extracurricular activities.

(q) The demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to maintain an environment for the child which is free from substance abuse.

(r) The capacity and disposition of each parent to protect the child from the ongoing litigation as demonstrated by not discussing the litigation with the child, not sharing documents or electronic media related to the litigation with the child, and refraining from disparaging comments about the other parent to the child.

(s) The developmental stages and needs of the child and the demonstrated capacity and disposition of each parent to meet the child's developmental needs.

(t) Any other factor that is relevant to the determination of a specific parenting plan, including the time-sharing schedule.

CAN PARENTS MAKE A PARENTING PLAN WITHOUT A JUDGE?
Parenting plans, formerly known as custody agreements, are required by the state of Florida and must be approved by the court. If the parents are able to agree on a parenting plan themselves without much dispute, the court will review the plan and evaluate the factors discussed in the above section. If the parenting plan is not approved by the court or the parents fail to mutually agree upon a plan, the court will step in and create a parenting plan themselves, removing a great deal of the parents' agency in the case. The benefit of state intervention in parenting plan agreements is the fact that they become legally enforceable, so a parent who believes their parental rights are being denied to them may petition the court for relief, with the aid of a skilled Florida family law attorney.

To facilitate the process of creating a parenting plan, the Florida Supreme Court drafted three generic plan types.

A basic parenting plan for two parents who live in close proximity
A parenting plan for when one parent is relocating or lives far from the other parent
A parenting plan for when one parent's time-sharing with the child must be supervised by a third party
Regarding parenting plans, the law requires:

A parenting plan approved by the court must, at a minimum:

1. Describe in adequate detail how the parents will share and be responsible for the daily tasks associated with the upbringing of the child

2. Include the time-sharing schedule arrangements that specify the time that the minor child will spend with each parent

3. Designate who will be responsible for

a. Any and all forms of health care. If the court orders shared parental responsibility over health care decisions, the parenting plan must provide that either parent may consent to mental health treatment for the child.

b. School-related matters, including the address to be used for school-boundary determination and registration.

c. Other activities

4. Describe in adequate detail the methods and technologies that the parents will use to communicate with the child.

Furthermore, the law firmly holds that "the court shall determine all matters relating to parenting and time-sharing of each minor child of the parties in accordance with the best interests of the child and in accordance with the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act." Because a judge is necessary for approving a parenting plan, it is crucial that each parent is equipped with an attorney experienced in family law.

CAN I MOVE TO ANOTHER STATE WITH MY CHILD(REN)?
Yes, if all parties legally entitled to time with the child sign a written agreement that reflects their consent to the child's relocation. This agreement must define how the other parent/party will be able to access and spend time with the child, including, if necessary, transportation agreements. This agreement can be ratified without a court hearing if no hearing is requested. If no such agreement can be reached, the parent who wishes to move with the child must file a petition to relocate with the court and serve it on the other parent. This parent has 20 days to retain legal representation and respond to the petition. Failure to respond will result in the court permitting the parent and child's relocation unless it is plainly not in the best interest of the child.

If the parent responds to the petition by opposing the relocation, they must provide a factual basis as to why they object the relocation, including a statement of the extent of that parent's involvement in the child's life. At this point the court could grant a temporary order, restraining the parent from relocating with the child or ordering the return of the child if the relocation has already taken place. Evidence will then be presented at a preliminary hearing and the court will weigh a number of factors in order to determine whether the move is in the child's best interest, given the strain it may impose on their relationship with the non-relocating parent.

Please note, if the relocation is approved, the law states:

(a) The court may, in its discretion, order contact with the non-relocating parent or other person, including access, time-sharing, telephone, Internet, webcam, and other arrangements sufficient to ensure that the child has frequent, continuing, and meaningful contact with the non-relocating parent or other person, if contact is financially affordable and in the best interest of the child.

(b) If applicable, the court shall specify how the transportation costs are to be allocated between the parents and other persons entitled to contact, access, and time-sharing and may adjust the child support award, as appropriate, considering the costs of transportation and the respective net incomes of the parents in accordance with the state child support guidelines schedule.

If a parent is temporarily relocating for a short duration from their principal residence, for the sake of vacation, education or health care for their child, then a petition to relocate is not necessary.

HOW FAR AWAY CAN I MOVE WITHOUT GOING BACK TO COURT?
50 miles. Any move greater than 50 miles constitutes a formal relocation, which requires the consent of the other parent who holds time-sharing rights and the approval of the court. Bear in mind, if you move to a different county and wish to make any changes to the parenting plan, you will need to change the venue to a different court of record. If you move within 50 miles of your original residence, the parenting plan will remain unchanged. The newfound distance, however, may make it more difficult or strenuous to maintain the terms of the time-sharing agreement with regards to transportation and other various costs.

DO I HAVE TO GO BACK TO THE ORIGINAL COUNTY TO MODIFY MY VISITATION PLAN (PARENTING PLAN)?
No, not necessarily. Modifications to the original parenting plan may be made in the same county circuit court where the parenting plan was drafted. However, the law allows:

For the convenience of the parties or witnesses or in the interest of justice, any court of record may transfer any civil action to any other court of record in which it might have been brought.

In the event that a child has been removed the state with the sole intention of removing the child from the original court's jurisdiction, the court may still move forward in approving or modifying a parenting plan, even in the child's absence from the state.

HOW CAN CHILD SUPPORT BE MODIFIED IN FLORIDA?
"The court [may] modify the amount and terms and conditions of the child support payments if the modification is found by the court to be in the best interests of the child; when the child reaches majority; if there is a substantial change in the circumstances of the parties; if s. 743.07(2) applies; or when a child is emancipated, marries, joins the armed services, or dies." Section 61.13(1)(a)2, Florida Statutes

This response is limited to a change based on "a substantial change in circumstances." In order for child support to be modified, the substantial, unforeseen and involuntary change of circumstances since the Final Judgment of Dissolution of Marriage or the most recent entry addressing child support was entered. The reason the court qualifies that the change in circumstances must be involuntary is to deter parents from voluntarily actions such as quitting their job for the sole purpose of obtaining a greater child support sum. This does not definitively mean that recipient parents who quit their job cannot receive increased child support from the other parent, nor does it entirely preclude a paying parent to have payments decreased if they quit their job - both scenarios are simply very unlikely, though not impossible; the court would handle this example on a case by case basis.

The guidelines may provide the basis for proving a substantial change in circumstances upon which a modification of an existing order may be granted. Whether you are a parent recipient of child support who is petitioning for an increase, or a parent paying child support petitioning a decrease, it is possible to modify child support in the state of Florida - provided the amount will be changed by at least $50 or 15% of the current child support amount. Section 61.30(1)(b), Florida Statutes

Child support in Florida can never be designated as un-modifiable. Establishing it or modifying it is not an easy process, but is much easier with an experienced attorney to guide you through.

Substantial changes which the court may consider in decreasing child support in Florida:

Loss of job by the paying parent
Loss of income by the paying parent
Increase in income of the receiving parent
Decrease in childcare expenses
Removing a child from the support order (i.e. child turns 18)
Removing medical support from an order
Substantial changes which the court may consider in increasing child support in Florida:

Loss of job by the receiving parent
Loss of income by the receiving parent
Increase in income of the paying parent
Increase in childcare expenses
Health insurance becomes available and insurance expenses ensue
Adding a child to the support order
Adding medical support to the order
A change of income is the most common reason for which the court is requested to modify child support. Naturally, the financial ability of a parent to pay child support or the relative financial necessity of the recipient parent for childcare expenses are the chief factors taken into account. Modifications are ultimately made if they are in the best interest of the child.

The court does not define exactly how much income must increase or decrease in order for child support to be modified, but the resultant change in child support must be a modification of at least $50 or 15% of the total amount. However, if the amount of child support differs by at least 10% from the amount calculated in Florida's child support guidelines (which only allow for deviations of 5%), the child support may be modified so that it aligns with the amount calculated in Florida's guidelines. A modification under these circumstances would not require proof of a substantial change, as it is considered correction of an oversight.

Changes in income are not the only circumstance under which the court modifies child support. A relatively new law allows the courts to consider parenting time as a factor for which child support may be modified. A parenting plan (formerly, custody agreement) will allocate time between the two parents. The court reviews this plan when child support is calculated. However, if the parents end up significantly deviating from the plan, this may be grounds for modification of child support. For example, if the parenting plan gives the recipient parent 280 overnights annually and the paying parent 85 overnights annually, but the actual split is closer to 220 overnights and 145 overnights, the court may reduce child support, because the recipient parent is not spending as much time with the children as previously agreed upon.

Section 61.30(11)(b), Florida Statutes

It is important to note that the court which entered the original child support order has jurisdiction over any proposed modifications. However, if the parents have moved a significant distance from the location of the original court, it is possible to change the court venue for the convenience of the parties involved.

LIMITATIONS FOR MODIFYING CHILD SUPPORT IN FLORIDA
The Florida Department of Revenue stipulates that:

1. Child support cannot be changed if the child support order will end within six months of receiving the request.

2. Child support cannot be changed if the support order has been reviewed or changed in the last 3 years, UNLESS the parents can show the aforementioned substantial change in the circumstances of either parent or child which would be grounds for modifying child support

HOW TO PETITION FOR A CHANGE IN CHILD SUPPORT IN FLORIDA
If you seek to modify child support in Florida, you must file a Supplemental Petition to Modify Child support. If you believe the other parent will contest your motion to modify child support, you are advised to speak with an attorney, especially if you believe the other parent has retained one already. Generally speaking, the process may be smoother if the two parents discuss the potential modification prior to filing a petition. If the parents agree prior to advancing with the court, there is far less room for dispute. This is not always possible, and sometimes attorneys are required even when the parents are in agreement. Generally, it is strongly recommended that you retain the services of an attorney if you wish to modify child support or contest a modification of child support.

If you choose not to retain an attorney, the court's Self Help staff will not:

give you legal advice or explain your rights
represent you in court
tell you what forms to file
tell you how to present your case
notify you that your case is ready to file
The process of modifying child support runs smoother with the advice and aid of an attorney. Florida courts give parents access to pre-approved forms which include instructions on how to fill them out properly. However, a parent must still compile supplemental information to support their claim that there has been a substantial change in circumstances. There must be documentation to support this claim. Furthermore, the parent must write a compelling argument as to why a modification of child support is necessary, appropriate and in the best interest of the child. This is where a Florida family law attorney can be of great use, as they are familiar with the law and can help you draft a compelling argument to justify the modification you seek. Once completed, the supplemental petition must be signed before a notary public or deputy clerk. You will need to make copies, one for you and one for the other parent, seeing as the clerk will keep the originals.

There is a $50 filing fee to reopen the child support order, a $10 summons fee, $1 per page copy made by the clerk, and $3.50 per notary signature.

The forms needed when petitioning for a change are as follows:

The Petition
Notice of Limitation of Services Provided/Disclaimer
Cover Sheet for Family Cases
Supplemental Petition for Modification of Child Support
Financial Affidavit
Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act (UCCJEA) Affidavit
Notice of Filing the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet and the Guidelines Worksheet (this should be filed no later than 45 days after filing the initial petition)
Certificate of Compliance with Mandatory Disclosure
Notice of Related Cases
Proof of attendance of an approved “Parenting Stabilization Course” (unless already filed)
The respondent parent will file:

An Answer and Waiver
Financial Affidavit
In Florida, there are two different financial affidavit forms - one for incomes under $50,000 and one for incomes above $50,000.

If the other parent files a counter-petition, you will have 20 days to answer their counter petition.

Bear in mind, depending on the jurisdiction, most courts mandate mediation outside of court. Mediation allows both parties to have open discourse about the matter before going to court, with the hope of coming to an agreement in mediation without ultimately requiring the court's intervention. If the parents cannot come to an agreement because of contested issues, a notice for trial must be filed. In turn, evidence and documents must be gathered for court and both parties will appear at a final hearing.

Given the relative complexity, a petitioning parent will want to leave as little room for error as possible. For this reason, it is critical that they retain a Florida family law attorney to help them navigate this process.

HOW IS CHILD SUPPORT DETERMINED IN FLORIDA?
Some parents are left confused by the way child support is calculated in Florida. Under Florida law, the parent of four children may pay less child support than a parent of one child for example, depending on the circumstances of the case. The method is not always straightforward or easy to comprehend. For parents currently going through a divorce and undergoing child support proceedings, the best thing they can do is arm themselves with knowledge of the Florida child support calculation method. Generally, a parent will continue to receive child support until the child has reached 18 years of age.

The guidelines dictating child support calculation in Florida are found under Florida Statute 61.30. The amount that the court ultimately orders can deviate from the amount dictated by the guidelines, but only by a small margin of 5% above or 5% below. If the court chooses to deviate from the guidelines by an amount greater than 5%, they must produce a written finding explaining their rationale for why the guidelines are unjust or inappropriate in this case. See Section 61.30(1)(a), Florida Statutes

The court may deviate from the amount set in the guidelines for any of the following reasons:

Extraordinary medical, psychological, educational, or dental expenses.
Independent income of the child
The payment of support for a parent which has been regularly paid and for which there is a demonstrated need.
Seasonal variations in one or both parents' incomes or expenses.
The age of the child, taking into account the greater needs of older children.
Special needs, such as costs that may be associated with the disability of a child
Total available assets of the paying parent, recipient parent and the child, if any.
The financial impact of the Internal Revenue Service Child & Dependent Care Tax Credit, Earned Income Tax Credit, dependency exemption and waiver of that exemption.
A case in which child support guidelines require a person to pay another person more than 55 percent of his or her gross income for a child support obligation for current support resulting from a single support order.
A child spending less than 20% of overnights with one parent
Any other adjustment that is needed to achieve an equitable result which may include, but not be limited to, a reasonable and necessary existing expense or debt. Such expense or debt may include, but is not limited to, a reasonable and necessary expense or debt that the parties jointly incurred during the marriage.
61.30(11)(a)
According to the Florida Department of Revenue, child support guidelines consider:

The income of both parents
The child's health care and childcare costs
The standard needs for the child
Number of days spent with the child by each parent
Basic child support amount in Florida
Child's age
Child's station in life
Child's standard of living
Child support payments cover:

Food
Insurance
Medical expenses not covered by insurance
Various childcare expenses necessary to wellbeing of child
Medical premiums
Child support payments can be made:

Twice per month
Every two weeks
Every week
The percentage of financial responsibility of each parent is determined by dividing the collective income of both parents by the individual income of each parent. Each parent's basic monthly obligation is determined by multiplying the number of children by each parent's percentage of financial responsibility.

WHAT DOES THE COURT CONSIDER WHEN DETERMINING THE INCOME OF EACH PARENT?
The court does not exclusively consider the annual salary of each parent. Other factors used to determine gross income include, but are not limited to:

Salary or wages.
Bonuses, commissions, allowances, overtime, tips, and other similar payments.
Business income from sources such as self-employment, partnership, close corporations, and independent contracts.
Disability benefits.
All workers' compensation benefits and settlements.
Reemployment assistance or unemployment compensation.
Pension, retirement, or annuity payments.
Social security benefits.
Spousal support received from a previous marriage or court ordered in the marriage before the court.
Interest and dividends.
Rental income, which is gross receipts minus ordinary and necessary expenses required to produce the income.
Income from royalties, trusts, or estates.
Reimbursed expenses or in-kind payments to the extent that they reduce living expenses.
Gains derived from dealings in property, unless the gain is nonrecurring.
Section 61.30(2)(a), Florida Statutes

Those factors are used to calculate gross income. The parents may then subtract some deductions in order to arrive at net income. These deductions include:

Federal, state, and local income tax deductions, adjusted for actual filing status and allowable dependents and income tax liabilities.
Federal insurance contributions or self-employment tax.
Mandatory union dues.
Mandatory retirement payments.
Health insurance payments, excluding payments for coverage of the minor child.
Court-ordered support for other children which is actually paid.
Spousal support paid pursuant to a court order from a previous marriage or the marriage before the court.     
Section 61.30(3), Florida Statutes

The figures of each parent's net income are then added together and the total monthly net income of the parents is determined. Each parent's percent responsibility is determined by dividing their individual net income by their collective net income. Whatever percentage this yields, each parent is then responsible for paying that percentage of the total child support amount arrived at in Florida's child support guidelines.

The following table shows the amount of child support ordered, depending on the monthly net income of both parents and the number of children they have. This is a sample of the full table, which begins at combined incomes of $800 minimum and $10,000 maximum:

 	Number of Children	 	 	 	 
Combined Monthly Net Income	1	2	3	4	5
$1,200	$280	$435	$544	$588	$594
$2,000	$442	$686	$859	$968	$1054
$2,500	$547	$847	$1061	$1196	1304
$2,800	$607	$941	$1178	$1328	$1448
$3,000	$644	$1001	$1252	$1412	$1540
$4,000	$828	$1288	$1603	$1816	$1982

If the total net income of the parents totals less than $800, the court's minimum net income figure, then the child support amount shall be determined by the court on a case by case basis. If the total net income of the parents totals more than the $10,000 maximum in the court's table, then the amount of child support will be determined as follows:

For combined monthly net income greater than the amount in the guidelines schedule, the obligation is the minimum amount of support provided by the guidelines schedule plus the following percentages multiplied by the amount of income over $10,000:

Child or Children
One	Two	Three	Four	Five	Six
5.0%	7.5%	9.5%	11.0%	12.0%	12.5%
Additional expenses such as health care premiums or school tuition would be above and beyond the obligation of child support and split between the two parents according to their percentage of parental responsibility.

If a parent incurs additional childcare costs because of employment, a job search, advancing education for the purpose of a job (i.e. babysitter expenses while a parent is taking courses in order to get a specific job), these expenses will be added on top of the basic child support obligation.

If the court finds that a parent has become voluntarily unemployed, with the aim of reducing their child support payments, the court will continue treating the parent as though they were employed full time and earning a full-time wage.

WHEN WILL CHILD SUPPORT STOP?
Generally, child support will end when the child attains 18 years of age. However, there are a few exceptions. If the child is over 18 but has not yet graduated high school, a child support order may continue until the child completes high school, so long as the child is performing in good faith and reasonably expected to graduate by the time he or she is 19.

Section 743.07(2). Florida Statutes

The court may require a parent to pay child support even when the child is greater than 18 years of age, if that child has a mental or physical incapacity which began before they turned 18.

Section 743.07(2), Florida Statutes

If there is more than one child in the support order, then the child support amount will decrease as each child individually reaches their 18th birthday, by only the proportional amount that that child was costing in child support.

The Income Withholding Order must specify the end date of child support. In the case of multiple children, the IWO will specify the reduced amount as each child attains majority (turns 18.)

Child support orders signed in Florida prior to October 2010 may not contain end dates. Furthermore, not all child support orders signed after October 2010 contain the legally mandated end dates in the support orders and corresponding IWOs. By citing specific termination dates, the court meant to facilitate the process of ending child support or reducing it because a child had aged out. These dates eliminated the need to return to court to terminate child support.

HOW CHILD SUPPORT IS TERMINATED IN FLORIDA
STOPPING DIRECT PAY
If child support has been made in direct payments by the paying parent to the recipient parent, the simplest means of terminating child support is simply stop sending checks or ceasing any alternative form of payment after the child's 18th birthday - provided there are no circumstances which require the parent to continue paying child support after the child turns 18. The child support case would not need to be reopened and no documents need be filed with the court. The paying parent is simply done with court-ordered child support payments.

TERMINATION BY JUDGE
In many cases, child support is paid directly to the state by the paying parent, or by the employer to the state on the parent's behalf. The Florida State Disbursement Unit is responsible for disbursing the child support payment to the recipient parent. This makes the child support payment method an affair of the state and creates much more red tape for the parent to navigate. Even though a termination date may be set in the support order or listed on the IWO, the paying parent must retain a family law attorney and get an order from the judge terminating their child support obligation. If the paying parent fails to do this, even when their child has turned 18, they may be accused by the FSDU of failing to pay child support. There are a number of state agencies that need to be made aware that the child support order has ended.

WHEN CHILD SUPPORT CAN NEVER BE TERMINATED IN FLORIDA
If you have a special needs child, it is possible that child support will be continued beyond the age of 19 and possibly for the rest of the child's life. If the recipient parent does not specify a child's special needs status in the final support order, they cannot reopen the order to have child support continue after the child turns 18. Therefore, if a child is special needs, this status must be listed in the court order, otherwise, child support will irreversibly terminate when the child turns 18.

WHEN CHILD SUPPORT CAN BE TERMINATED BEFORE THE CHILD TURNS 18
It is also possible for child support to be terminated before the child acquires 18 years of age. In the event the child marries before the age of 18, is emancipated, voluntarily moves out or joins the military, the state presumes the child is now supporting themselves and the recipient parent is no longer in need of child support payments.However, the paying parent should obtain a court order to protect for a charge of non-payment.

WHAT IF THE FATHER/MOTHER REFUSES TO PAY CHILD SUPPORT?
There are various serious consequences if a parent fails or refuses to pay child support in the state of Florida. If a financially able parent refuses to pay, they may:

be held in contempt of the court
receive up to 180 days of jail time
see their credit score adversely affected
have liens placed on their property
A parent who is not receiving child support because the other parent is refusing to pay can begin by retaining a Florida child support enforcement attorney and contacting their local child support office. Once the state has been made aware of the parent's failure to pay, the Florida Department of Revenue can compel the parent in question to pay child support or file for a hearing. Such a hearing would be presided over by a hearing officer in lieu of a formal judge. The Florida Department of Revenue would file a Motion for Contempt, and the hearing officer would be presented with evidence of the parent's refusal to pay child support.

Enforcement may occur in the form of a simple letter, alerting the parent that payment is late and legal repercussions will follow if they do not pay. Alternatively, collection efforts may be formally instituted by a Florida state collection agency. Another option is to deduct child support payments from income tax returns, worker's compensation relief or unemployment paychecks. It is possible for a nonpaying parent to incarcerated until all payments are made, depending on the circumstances of the case. It is the legal responsibility of the parent alleging nonpayment to prove that the nonpaying parent is financially able to pay and refusing to do so. For this reason and many others, a parent seeking to act against a nonpaying parent is advised to retain a family law attorney, experienced with Florida child support law.

In addition to the above courses of action, penalties may apply for a parent who has failed to pay child support. These penalties include:

Driver's license suspension
Supplemental fine payment
Bank accounts seized
Seizing occupational licenses
A parent will not be exempted from paying child support if they move out of state. All 50 states have adopted the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act which holds that no other state can alter the child support order entered by another state as long one of the parents is still residing in that original state. Therefore, if a father moves out of Florida and stops paying child support, a court in his new state of residence will not be able to alter or alleviate his child support duty if the mother still resides in Florida with the child.

Per the Federal Child Support Recovery Act, if an out-of-state parent accrues at least $5000 in unpaid child support and does not pay for over a year, this constitutes a misdemeanor which is punishable by up to 6 months in prison. This applies to first-time offenders. Subsequent offenders may be punished by up to 2 years in prison. If a parent takes more than two years to pay an accrued child support balance of $5000 or accrues and fails to pay $10,000, they may be sentenced to 2 years in prison.

In addition, the state of Florida has a Child Support Enforcement Bureau which operates in 12 of Florida's 67 counties offers the following services:

Establishment of Paternity
Establishment of Support
Establishment of Paternity & Support
Enforcement of Child Support Obligations
Modification of Child Support Obligations
It is important to note that child support debt can neither expire nor be eliminated in bankruptcy.

MAY I CUT OFF VISITATION (REFUSE TO HONOR TIME-SHARING) WHEN THE OTHER PARENT MISSES CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS?
No. Florida law strongly believes a parent cannot and should not be denied access to time with their child because a relationship with both parents is presumed to be in the best interest of the child. Child support and visitation/time-sharing are two entirely separate legal issues and do not infringe upon one another unless a refusal to pay an amount in excess of $5,000 results in a parent being jailed or imprisoned.

A parent cannot withhold visitation from the other parent because they are not paying child support. Although it is entirely possible to modify visitation for different reasons, it is very unlikely the court will ever completely sever visitation between parent and child, unless the parent is dangerous or visitation contradicts the child's best interests.

Section 61.13(4)(a), Florida Statutes

Otherwise, to deny visitation, even to a parent failing to pay child support, violates their parental rights. In addition, if a parent withholds visitation from a non-paying parent, this could harm their good standing with the court for which there may be repercussions.

By withholding visitation on this principle, parents are wrongfully operating in the notion that time spent with a child is 'bought' with payment of child support. This is not the case at all. A relationship with one's child is not 'earned' because they paid a court-ordered amount. For this reason, they cannot be denied that relationship even if they fail or refuse to pay child support. It is a separate legal issue and the child should not take the brunt of the parents' financial quarrels by being denied time with one parent. Visitation is not only the right of both parents but the right of the child as well.

MAY I STOP PAYING CHILD SUPPORT BECAUSE MY VISITATION HAS BEEN CUT OFF?
No. Voluntarily failing to pay child support is illegal and would only hurt your child because the parent may in turn not be able to adequately provide for them.

Section 61.13(4)(b), Florida Statutes

Even if the financial situation is not quite so cut and dry, a parent may not cease paying child support for any reason, lest they are held in contempt of the court with the potential for a number of penalties, discussed above. By denying visitation, the other parent is already in violation of the custody order and possibly contempt of the court. As the denied parent, you do not want to join him or her. If you are being denied visitation rights, continue paying child support and seek assistance from the court. If you seek out an attorney, they will likely be able to file a Motion to Enforce the Custody Order.

HOW DO I BECOME THE LEGAL GUARDIAN OF AN ADULT IN FLORIDA?
In order to become the legal guardian of an adult in the state of Florida, three things must first be established.

1. The ward's mental capacity or lack thereof
2. The ward's proposed guardian must be appointed to carry out the ward's financial or personal affairs
3. The guardian must provide accounting for the court of the ward's affairs

A person is qualified to be a guardian if he or she is at least 18 years and a Florida resident. However, the law states:

A nonresident of the state may serve as guardian of a resident ward if he or she is:
(a) Related by lineal consanguinity to the ward
(b) A legally adopted child or adoptive parent of the ward
(c) A spouse, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, niece, or nephew of the ward, or someone related by lineal consanguinity to any such person
(d) The spouse of a person otherwise qualified under this section.

A person is disqualified from being a guardian if he or she has been convicted of a felony, committed abuse, abandonment or neglect toward a child, or "from any incapacity or illness, is incapable of discharging the duties of a guardian."

Adult guardianship is defined as "the process by which the court finds an individual's ability to make decisions is impaired, therefore the court gives the right to make decisions to another person or entity. Guardianship is only warranted when no less restrictive alternatives, such as a durable power of attorney, a trust, a health care surrogate or proxy, or another form of pre-need directive, are found by the court to be appropriate and available. Legislative intent establishes that the least restrictive form of guardianship is desirable if it is in the best interest of the ward.

A person who wishes to act as guardian of an adult ward would retain an attorney and file a Petition for Adult Guardianship with the court. Their lawyer would help them navigate the process with the court.

In a Florida divorce or custody battle, the caliber of legal representation you choose has a powerful effect on the final outcome of your case. Former Judge Fred Koberlein has been practicing law in the state of Florida for almost 40 years and is committed to defending your rights in a divorce or child custody battle. Do not hesitate to contact Koberlein Law Offices online or by telephone at 386-269-9802 for their Lake City offices, and 352-519-4357 for their Gainesville offices. 

When divorcing parents come into court for a decision on parenting arrangements, judges in Florida base their decisions on the best interests of the child. While a judge will assess every situation individually, Florida law recognizes that children generally benefit from maintaining frequent contact with both parents and from having both parents participate in parental decision-making after divorce. Neither parent begins with any greater right to custody. Judges can consider any factor relevant to parenting, and are guided by some factors that are set out in the state’s laws—generally falling into the following basic categories:

Health and Safety
Florida’s policy in favor of shared parental responsibility will not apply if a court finds that it would be detrimental to the child. Parents may lose custody or visitation rights if there’s evidence of domestic or sexual violence, or evidence of child abuse, abandonment, or neglect. It’s also possible for a judge to order supervised visitation. Other factors a court may consider in assessing a child’s health and safety include the mental and physical health of the parents or evidence of substance abuse within a parent’s home.

Emotional and Developmental Needs
Judges expect parents to put the needs of their children first, before their own. A court will consider the extent to which each parent has demonstrated an ability and desire to meet a child’s developmental needs and be involved in the child’s life. This might include evidence that the parent knows the child’s friends, teachers, and medical care providers; is aware of the child’s daily activities and favorite things; and has participated in the child’s school and extracurricular activities. The court will also consider each parent’s ability to provide routines for the child, including consistent discipline and daily schedules for homework, meals, and bedtime, and the extent to which each parent participated in parenting tasks prior to the divorce. Courts favor arrangements that maintain stability and minimize disruption. A judge will consider the impact of frequent travel between the homes of the parents, particularly when the children are young. A judge who believes that a child is old enough and mature enough to make intelligent and independent choices may allow the child to state a preference as to custody.

Co-Parenting and Communication Skills
Florida law places a strong emphasis on the ability of each parent to encourage a positive relationship between the child and the other parent. The court will assess each parent’s ability and willingness to honor the time-sharing schedule, and to make reasonable adjustments without resorting to court intervention. A court will also consider each parent’s ability to communicate with the other parent, to keep the other parent informed of the child’s activities and other issues, and to adopt a unified front regarding major issues. A court might reduce a parent’s custody or parenting time if the parent provides false evidence of domestic violence, sexual violence, child abuse, child abandonment, or child neglect against the other parent. Parents are also expected to protect a child from the stress of divorce, including refraining from making disparaging comments about the other parent in front of the child.

Moral Fitness
Florida law provides that the moral fitness of a parent is a factor in determining the best interests of a child. Moral fitness generally refers to circumstances that might affect a child’s moral and ethical development—for example, substance abuse, frequent casual relationships with multiple partners, verbal abuse, or illegal behavior. Whether or not a court might consider the behavior of an adulterous parent during the marriage would depend upon whether such behavior had a significant negative impact upon the child.

Custody Options
Custody consists of both legal custody, which refers to a parent’s responsibility for making major decisions concerning a child’s health, education, or general welfare; and physical custody, which refers to the child’s physical presence with a parent. Florida law favors joint legal custody unless there is evidence that this would be detrimental to the child. Parents are free to divide responsibilities between themselves over matters of education, health care, or other aspects of a child’s welfare, provided that the division is consistent with the child’s best interests. A court may also grant sole legal custody to one parent, with or without time-sharing with the other parent. A judge granting joint legal custody may also decide that the child should spend approximately equal amounts of time with each parent, or may find that it is better for the child to have one primary physical home and to spend specific periods of time at the home of the other parent. There is no presumption either in favor of or against any specific time-sharing schedule in a parenting plan.

Parenting Plans
Florida law requires parents who will share time with minor children to have written parenting plans. In order for a plan to be approved by the court, it must include, at a minimum, details of the following:

a plan for sharing responsibility for daily parenting tasks
the child’s time-sharing schedule
a designated address for school registration and other activities; and
a specification of methods and technologies that parents will use to communicate with the child.
a designation of who will be responsible for health care and school-related matters


The Law Offices of Lawrence S. Katz, P.A. provides powerful, professional representation in complex family law matters. Our experienced, highly rated lawyer has the skill and knowledge to guide you through the Florida divorce process. Contact The Law Offices of Lawrence S Katz, P.A. at 305-670-8656 or online to discuss your case.

What are the grounds for divorce in Florida?
Florida is a no-fault divorce state. This means that you can get a divorce or dissolution of marriage on grounds that the marriage is irretrievably broken or that one of the parties is mentally incapacitated. You can also allege traditional grounds for divorce, such as adultery or abandonment, if it is strategically wise to prove fault in your specific circumstances. Proof that the other spouse committed acts of domestic violence, made false statements on government forms or dissipated assets can work to your benefit when it is time for the judge to make decisions regarding child custody, alimony and property divisions.

How long does it take to get a court date or to have my case fully resolved in the Florida divorce process?
The length of the Florida divorce process in your case depends on the circumstances of your particular situation, your spouse and their attorney. An uncontested divorce can be finalized in a matter of weeks. Complex matrimonial issues can take much longer, even years, to finalize. If spouses are able to reach an agreement on all material issues in the divorce, the time it takes to get divorced can be significantly shortened. We work hard to quickly and efficiently reach the resolution that works for you and your family.

How much does it cost to file for divorce?
In Miami-Dade County, the clerk of the court charges $409 to accept your petition for dissolution of marriage and officially open a court case. This fee is collected by Miami-Dade County at the time the petition is filed and is in addition to the cost of the issuance of a summons and the legal services we provide.

What is mediation?
Mediation is essentially a negotiation process facilitated by a neutral third party, the mediator. The mediator meets with the parties and their attorneys to explore ways to resolve disputed issues in a divorce. Some judges order parties to participate in mediation before they can get a final hearing date. An order to participate in mediation is simply that — an order to participate. It is not an order to settle the case. Naturally, we expect that the parties will act in good faith in an effort to resolve the case without protracted litigation.

Since filing for divorce, my spouse refuses to let me see our children. Is there anything I can do?
We can assist you in filing for a temporary relief order to give you a parenting plan and time-sharing with the children until the final hearing. If you do nothing, you risk letting your relationship with your children deteriorate. Inaction could also lead the court to believe that the children are not that important to you.

How is child support calculated?
Children are entitled to financial support from both parents, and the amount of child support due is based, in part, on both parents’ incomes and the amount of time-sharing each parent has with the minor child. Generally, the parent with whom the child lives the majority of the time receives child support from the other parent or, in equal time-sharing plans, the parent who has the lower income will receive child support.

If I am a stay-at-home parent, how can I pay for living expenses while the divorce is pending?
Stay-at-home parents often worry about being able to provide for themselves and their children during divorce. Our compassionate family law attorney can help you get temporary spousal support and temporary child support to provide for your family until the divorce is resolved.

How is custody (time-sharing) determined?
Judges consider a number of factors when deciding who gets a certain percentage of overnights of the children. Factors include the strength of each parent’s relationship and bond with the children, which parent is the primary caregiver for the children, which parent is most likely to encourage visitation (time-sharing) with the other parent and whether each parent is physically and mentally capable of caring for the child. Previous domestic violence, aggression, neglect, abuse and other bad behavior weigh heavily against a parent seeking custody.

How is spousal support determined?
There is no set amount or formula for calculating spousal support in Florida. Rather, judges consider a number of factors, including:

The length of the marriage
Each spouse’s education and skill level
Whether either spouse is disabled
Evidence of fault for the breakdown of the marriage, if any
Financial needs of the spouse asking for alimony
Whether the responding spouse has the ability to pay alimony

Florida Family Law FAQs
What is timesharing: timesharing is when the parties agree or a judge determines at trial when each parent will see their child(ren) and how often.

Paternity: Did you know that if you are married and your wife gives birth to another man’s child that you are legally deemed to be the biological father of that child. You will be responsible for child support and all other rights the child is entitled to. Please call the law office of Sacks & Sacks if you are in this unfortunate situation. We can make sure that paternity is disestablished so that you are not legally responsible for a child that is not yours.

Same sex marriages: Did you know that same sex marriages are now considered valid in the state of Florida? Did you know that same sex marriages can be dissolved in the state of Florida? If you are a party to a same sex marriage you have the same rights as a party to an opposite sex marriage. Call the law office of sacks & sacks so that you can be advised of your marital rights.

Child custody/timesharing evaluations: Did you know that parties can agree or a judge can enter an order requiring a child custody or timesharing evaluator to meet with the parents of a child; the child(ren) and any other witnesses that are deemed necessary to make a recommendation to a judge as to what is in the best interest of a child? Not all evaluators were created equal. As in any profession, you have the good and the bad. Please contact the law office of sacks & sacks so that we can make sure that the best possible evaluator is appointed to your case. You need an evaluator that is neutral and unbiased so that you are in a position to achieve your goals regarding your children. Choosing the wrong evaluator can have a negative impact on your case.

What is Child Support? All children in the state of Florida are entitled to child support. Child support is to be paid by both parents and the amount is based on the parent’s income. Failure to pay child support could lead to a driver’s license suspension, incarceration, and more. Child support applies to people getting divorced and to people who were never married to each other.

What is Spousal support? Depending on the parties financial circumstances and so long as the parties are married to each other, one party may be entitled to spousal support while the divorce is pending and possible permanent alimony when the case is finalized.

What is a Parenting plan? There are different types of parental responsibility in Florida: shared parental responsibility and sole parental responsibility. Most parties have shared parental responsibility where both parents work together to make decisions that are in the best interest of the child(ren). In some circumstances one parent is deemed unfit and the other parent is awarded sole parental responsibility. That parent solely makes all decisions regarding the best interests of the child.

Who gets custody? Custody is based on a determination of where the child(ren) will live. In some instances, one parent may have majority time sharing (having the child each week and every other weekend. The other parent will have the child every other weekend.) Joint custody is when the living arrangement is 50% for the mother and 50% for the father. All holidays are usually divided equally but the parents have latitude to be creative.

Parents who divorce or break up will almost always continue to be a part of one another’s lives through the process of raising their children. Florida family courts will attempt to find a fair division of time that each parent will have with their child, as well as a fair division of the costs of raising that child. Read on to learn the answers to some frequently asked questions about Florida child support, and contact the skilled and effective Clearwater family law attorneys at The Law Firm for Family Law with any additional questions.

How is child support calculated in Florida?
Courts in Florida calculate child support by looking at the net income of each parent, the number of children, the amount of overnights that each parent spends with the child/children, and other expenses such as the cost of daycare and health care for the child. The court will use what’s known as an “income shares model” to determine what child support should be paid by estimating the amount that the parents would spend on their children if the family still lived in one home, and then dividing that amount between the parents in proportion to their income.

Can the amount of child support be changed?
There are cases where Florida courts can change the amount of child support that parents owe from what would be due under the formula courts use to calculate support. If the variation from the formula is 5% or less, judges may rely solely on their discretionary authority to make the change. If the change would be more than 5% higher or lower than the result of the formula, courts will need to see evidence of why the change should occur based on factors such as:

A child’s special needs
A change in the paying parent’s income based on seasonal variation
Supplemental sources of income for the child, such as trust income or supplemental security income paid to the child
The child’s age, under the assumption that older children need greater financial support
Unexpected costs related to the child’s medical, dental, psychological, or educational needs
Changes to the parents’ assets and resources
What happens if my co-parent doesn’t pay?
Only in dire circumstances are parents relieved of the obligation to support their children financially, and parents can face stiff penalties for failing to provide the support they owe for their children’s care. Florida courts have a number of tools at their disposal to get non-paying parents to meet their child support obligation, such as by garnishing their wages, intercepting tax refunds, suspending their driver’s license, or even criminal prosecution. An attorney at The Law Firm for Family Law in Clearwater can help you petition the court for assistance when your co-parent refuses to uphold their legal duty to support your child.

When does child support end in Florida?
By default, Florida child support ends on the child’s 18th birthday. If the child has not yet graduated from high school, support may continue until they do. Courts may also extend child care in cases where the child has a serious disability that requires ongoing in-home care.

Florida Child Custody
Under Florida law, child custody is decided by the courts based on the best interests of the child under the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act, a national set of laws governing child custody throughout the country. Child custody includes both legal and physical custody. Parents with legal custody of their child are allowed to make decisions regarding education, religion, medical care, and discipline. Physical custody involves the actual location where the child will reside.

Child custody may be either shared or sole custody. The Florida courts have a strong preference for shared custody arrangements, also known as “time-sharing,” unless there is evidence to suggest that shared custody would not be in the best interests of the child.

Parenting Plans
In Florida, parents have the option to agree on a parenting plan outside of the courtroom, which establishes the “time-sharing” schedule for the parents and addresses how parental responsibilities, including legal decisions, will be handled between the two parties. The time-sharing schedule sets forth the time that each parent will spend with their children during the week and during the weekends, as well as where they will sleep each night. These schedules also address where children will spend their time during school breaks, long weekends, and on holidays.

If parents are able to agree on a parenting plan through negotiation, they can then submit the plan to the court, where it will be approved as long as both legal and physical custody have been adequately addressed.

Best Interests of the Child
When parents are unable to agree on a parenting plan for their children, the court must determine one for them. This determination is based on the best interests of the child and includes many different factors, such as:

The length of time the child has lived in a stable and satisfactory environment
The geographical viability of the individual parent’s homes
The moral fitness of both parents
The mental and physical health of both parents
The demonstrated ability of each parent to provide a consistent routine
The demonstrated ability of each parent to communicate with the other
Any knowledge of domestic violence or abuse occurring within the household
Any substance abuse by either parent
Additionally, if the child is determined to be old enough to express a preference, the court will consider the wishes of the child in determining custody and the parenting plan. These factors are numerous, and often complicated, so it is important to consult an experienced child custody lawyer if you and your spouse are having difficulty negotiating a parenting plan.


I'm about to get married. What do I need to know? 
Marriage is an exciting step to make. It is also a life-changing event. You must keep in mind that marriage is a legal relationship as well as an emotional one. That means that when a marriage ends, the relationship must go through a legal division as well. One way to make this dissolution easier is by entering into a legal agreement prior to marriage that will determine how the separation will take place. This is called a prenuptial agreement.

This legal document essentially states how the couple's economic resources and property will be divided should one spouse die or if the marriage ends in divorce. This agreement does not extend to determining child support but will help with property such as cars or a house. If you are looking to enter into such an agreement, it is advisable to hire an attorney who can answer any of your questions and will help make sure the process follows every legal requirement.

For more information on marital agreements, read our Marital Agreement FAQ.

What steps should I take prior to getting a divorce? 
When you decide to file for divorce, there are a number of issues that you must keep in mind. First you must find out if you meet all the legal requirements to go through the process. In order to file for dissolution, either you or your spouse must have been a resident of Florida for at least six months or are stationed in the state as a member of the armed forces. Once this requirement is met, either you or your spouse must believe that the marriage is irretrievably broken.

As Florida is a no-fault state, you do not have to prove that your spouse committed an act, such as adultery or abuse, in order to justify the divorce. Second, you must be aware of the economic issues that will arise. Upon dissolution of marriage, the assets and liabilities that you and your spouse have accumulated will be divided between the two of you. This means that any economic assist that developed over the course of the marriage will be equitably distributed.

If you and your spouse agree as to how these resources will be divided, you may be able to have an uncontested divorce. If not, a judge will decide how these are divided. Third, you must consider the physical and emotional safety of both you and your children. A divorce can be a trying time. Anger can easily lead to violence. If you are worried about how your spouse will react to the divorce, you should take steps to protect yourself and your children. Do not neglect yourself during this challenging time.

How do I file for divorce in Florida? 
When a marriage is determined to be irretrievably broken, you can file for a petition for dissolution of marriage. This petition will include what you want from the court in terms of the divorce. There are four basic types of petitions that you can file depending on your situation. These include a Petition for Simplified Dissolution of Marriage, Petition for Dissolution of Marriage with a Dependent or Minor Child, Petition for Dissolution of Marriage with Property but No Dependent, and Petition for Dissolution of Marriage with No Dependent or Property. A notice is sent to the other spouse who must respond within 20 days.

This response will include an answer to the requirements of the initial petition and any other issues the spouse wants resolved. Both spouses will be required to provide a number of financial documents and an affidavit. Separating financial resources is often the most difficult aspect of the entire process. If you and your spouse cannot agree upon the division, you will have to go through a judge. The judge will divide both the assets and liabilities based on equitability, or what the judge deems to be fair. This could be based on who is more capable of taking on debt and who needs more help getting back on their feet. Often, it is helpful to have an attorney during this process.

How is child support determined? 
It is well known that children are often the party that is most harmed in a divorce. Many children feel as though they must take on the responsibility of their parents' separation. Because of this, you and your spouse should have the wellbeing of your children as your top priority. Custody must be determined, followed by child support. When a court determines how much child support must be paid, they look at a number of factors. They will look at the income of both parents and what the child will need. This includes health care and schooling costs. Much of this will depend on the child's age and the standard of living the family enjoyed prior to the separation.

How long will my divorce take? 
Every divorce is unique. This means that no set pattern can be followed. Though every couple must follow the state's laws concerning the dissolution, the amount of time that everything will take depends entirely on the couple's specific situation and the type of divorce they are filing. The easiest and quickest process is an uncontested, simple divorce. This kind of separation could be completed within a number of weeks.

Such dissolution occurs when the couple agrees about every aspect of the separation and there are no children or dependents involved. However, the process will only take longer when more factors are entered into the equation. If you and your spouse cannot agree on the details of the separation, the courts will have to get involved and the time until completion could be extended significantly.

What should I know about setting up a visitation schedule? 
A visitation schedule will most likely be set up by the courts while you and your spouse are going through your divorce. Normally, a court will try to give equal visitation rights to both parents so that the child can spend as much time as possible with each individual. The schedule will primarily be constructed according to the type of custody that has been determined and the proximity of both parents. If one parent lives far away from the child, they may receive a continuous period of visitation time such as over the summer. When this schedule is determined, you must keep in mind that the courts will make decisions based off of what is in the best interests of the child.

If I have to relocate, what should I do about child custody? 
When a parent decides to relocate with a child, it is called a change of residence address. In order for a move to be considered relocation, it must be a change of principal residence of more than 50 miles away from their original place of residence. If you and your former spouse both agree to the relocation, the two of you must sign a written agreement that indicates their consent, designates visitation rights, and if necessary describes transportation arrangements for the visitation.

If you and your former spouse have not entered into an agreement, you must file a Notice of Intent to Relocate. This notice includes a description of the location of the new residence and the reason for the move. It must also include a proposal for a new visitation schedule as well as the transportation arrangements to accommodate the schedule. Your former spouse must respond to this notice within 30 days. A failure to do so will automatically validate the relocation.

Do I need a lawyer if both spouses agree on everything? 
When you and your spouse agree about every aspect of the divorce process, it is called an uncontested divorce. Such a divorce can be classified under two categories: standard and simplified. A standard uncontested divorce occurs when both parties agree on how to divide all assets and debts. A simplified uncontested divorce occurs only when there are no children or dependents involved. In this process, you and your spouse give up your rights to a trial and an appeal.

When going into an uncontested divorce, it is often best to go through the mediation process. A mediator is an attorney or family counselor who works as an unbiased third party to help mediate the process. Though you do not need a lawyer to file a divorce or go through the whole process, often it very helpful do so. Your lawyer can guide you through this process and a mediator can help to assure that everyone is treated fairly.

What if my ex-spouse violates our visitation schedule? 
Both you and your spouse must follow the support and visitation agreements that the court prescribed. This acquiescence does not always happen though. If your spouse has violated the agreed upon visitation schedule, they may be held in contempt of court. You must file a motion for contempt if you want your ex-spouse to face legal consequences. Such consequences include fines, increased visitation times to account for those missed, and even jail time. Such penalties will be determined based off of the situation and how long the violations have been occurring.

How do I modify my alimony agreement? 
Alimony, or spousal support, is not necessarily a permanent payment. Often, this support will need to be modified or even terminated based on the changes in living situations that both parties see. If the spouse who is paying the alimony can no longer sustain the financial support, they may be able to appeal the courts to change the agreement.

If the spouse receiving the support no longer needs the consistent payments or can live on less support, the other spouse may also file a petition for modification or abatement. In most situations, financial documentation concerning the change in financial status of either spouse must be provided. If you are looking to modify your alimony agreement, an attorney can walk you through the process.

What do we do with the kids until we have a court order in place?

Married parents, regardless of whether they are separated, have equal rights to their children unless a court order specifies otherwise. Time-sharing with the children before a court order is in place can be difficult unless the parents can amicably work together to come up with a temporary schedule. Unreasonably denying the other parent time-sharing with the child or children is a factor considered by the court when deciding the issue of time-sharing in a divorce case in Florida, so that should be kept in mind throughout the separation and divorce process by both parents. At McGinnis Law Firm, we assist both mothers and fathers with parenting plans and time sharing arrangements. Our attorney and family mediator, Wendy K. McGinnis, will look into the specifics of your child custody case to advise you of the best approach.

Can I move out of the house?

In Florida, when a married person wants to move out of their jointly owned marital home, they can do so and will not be abandoning their rights to the marital home. However, this does not necessarily mean that the spouse moving out of the marital home will be free from any financial obligation towards the marital home, especially if there is a mortgage in joint names and/or other expenses for the marital home. Even if one spouse moves out of the marital home, a court can still order that spouse to pay towards the mortgage and other expenses of the marital home. McGinnis Law Firm represents divorcing clients. We facilitate the legal process for you, which may include settlement negotiations and court proceedings. We look into the specifics of your case to advise you of the best approach.

Can I take money out of the joint bank account?

Unless a court order is in place stating otherwise, either spouse may take money out of their joint bank account, however whether a spouse should do so is more complicated. When the money is taken out of the joint account, the amount that is taken out and by whom, and how the money is used are all up for consideration by the court in a divorce case in Florida, so having the advice of an attorney before making any drastic decisions is recommended. In some cases, if a person has a reasonable belief that their spouse is going to withdraw most or all of the monies in the joint bank account, then taking half of the money out of the joint bank account to keep separately in an individual account and leaving the other half for the spouse may be the best option in that scenario. However, there are other options as well as to what should be done with those funds until an agreement can be reached or a court order can be put into place. One such option would be having the joint bank account frozen, especially in a situation where both parties will have sufficient financial support from other income or assets for the duration of the divorce process. Our attorney and family mediator, Wendy K. McGinnis, will look into the specifics of your case to advise you of the best approach.

At what age can a child decide which parent to live with?

In Florida, a child cannot decide which parent to live with or what time-sharing schedule each parent is going to have with the child. Depending on the age and maturity of the child, the court may allow the child to testify with regard to time-sharing and other pertinent issues in a custody case, however the court must still make a custody decision based on the best interest of the child, which may or may not be what the child wants. Contact our Tampa area child custody attorney today for experienced, efficient legal representation. We understand your legal concerns and are dedicated to helping you find the best possible solution.

Should I be paying child support before the divorce is filed?

Child support is an obligation of both of the parents for the benefit of their child(ren) when they are no longer living together, before as well as during a divorce case. Since child support can be ordered retroactively for up to 24 months in an initial child support case, the court can consider proof of child support paid by one parent to the other and typically the court will give a credit to the paying spouse for the amount of child support paid against the child support arrearage owed. However, the amount of each parent's child support obligation is affected by the incomes of the parents as well as the time-sharing schedule, so it is recommended that you consult with an attorney if you are in this situation to find out what your child support obligation is, if any. Contact our Tampa child support and child custody modification lawyer for a free consultation. Our offices are open 8 a.m. - 5 p.m., Monday - Friday. For your convenience, we accept Visa, MasterCard and Discover.

Can my spouse and I have the same attorney?

No, in Florida an attorney may only represent one of the spouses in a divorce case. However, this does not mean that both spouses must have attorneys in a divorce case. It is not uncommon in an uncontested divorce case for only one of the spouses to have an attorney to prepare the settlement agreement and other documents such as the petition and final judgment in the case. The attorney representing the one spouse in that scenario can negotiate and communicate with the non-represented spouse throughout the uncontested divorce process but may not provide legal advice to the non-represented spouse, and it must be clear that the attorney is not representing both spouses. Please Contact McGinnis Law Firm P.A., for a free consultation. Our offices are open 8 a.m. - 5 p.m., Monday - Friday. For your convenience, we accept Visa, MasterCard and Discover.

Is there legal separation in Florida or Do I legally have to separate before a divorce?

Florida is a no-fault state, which means that (provided the residency requirements for filing a divorce case in Florida are met) a spouse may file for divorce generally with only having to allege and testify that the marriage is "irretrievably broken," which basically is defined as a marriage that cannot be saved even with counseling or other means. There is no requirement in Florida that a married couple be separated for any period of time before filing for divorce, and there is no requirement in Florida to allege or prove adultery or abuse as a reason for filing for divorce that some other states require as "fault". On the other hand, if a married couple in Florida wants to separate and one or both of the spouses want a court order as to financial support during the separation without having to file for divorce, then either spouse may file a petition for support unconnected with dissolution of marriage requesting such financial support. Contact our Florida divorce attorney today for experienced, efficient divorce representation. We understand your concerns and are dedicated to helping you find the best possible solution.

What other requirements are there to file a divorce in Florida?

In order to file for divorce in Florida, provided neither spouse is mentally incapacitated, at least one of the spouses must be a Florida resident for the six months immediately preceding the filing of the divorce petition, and the spouse filing for divorce must allege and eventually testify that the marriage is irretrievably broken, meaning that the marriage cannot be saved even with counseling or other means. At McGinnis Law Firm, P.A., our goal is for you to feel comfortable throughout your case. We focus on keeping you well informed while providing you with experienced legal representation. We explain how things work without using complicated legal terms. We want to make the process of meeting your legal needs as simple as possible for you.

Do you have to file divorce in the same state you were married?

No, where you were married does not determine whether you can divorce in Florida. For example, if you were married in New York, but you have been a Florida resident continuously for the past six months with the intent to remain a Florida resident, you or your spouse can file for a divorce in Florida. Our Florida divorce attorney has over 15 years of experience representing clients in Florida family law cases, including both contested and uncontested dissolution of marriage matters. Contact McGinnis Law Firm, P.A. to schedule your free initial consultation.

If my spouse and I agree on a divorce, do we still need an attorney?

Having an attorney is not a requirement in a divorce case, regardless of whether it is an uncontested divorce or not. However, even if you and your spouse agree on all of the issues, it is typically advisable that an attorney be consulted and retained to prepare at least the marital settlement agreement, which can prevent future legal complications between you and your spouse. Drafting a marital settlement agreement on your own instead of having an experienced qualified attorney draft it can result in various costly legal disputes after the divorce is over, such as a dispute about an issue that you and your spouse failed to address in your agreement or a dispute about an issue that was addressed in your agreement but is too vague or ambiguous to understand. Contact us today to schedule a free initial consultation with a knowledgeable attorney. We provide efficient, personalized representation in a comfortable atmosphere.


Most people don’t really know exactly what the term “family law” means. Some may believe that a family lawyer simply means an attorney hired by regular people to handle their legal matters – whatever those may be.

 

But this is a specific area of the law that deals with family and domestic issues. What does that mean? Well, the one that most people gravitate towards first is divorce. And it’s true that family lawyers do handle a lot of divorce cases. But we also deal with issues such as paternity, domestic violence, and more.

 

If you are in the middle of a situation like the ones described above, you probably have a number of questions about how to proceed. While sitting down with a Florida family lawyer will be able to give you the best advice tailored to your unique situation, there are certain questions almost everyone has.

 

Below, we’re going to cover the most frequently asked questions about family law in Florida.

 

Do I have to live in Florida to get divorced in Florida?
Short answer: yes. In order to get divorced in Florida, you do have to meet the residency requirement. Either you or your spouse has to be a Florida resident for at least six months. You can show proof of your residency with a valid Florida’s driver’s license, which was issued more than six months prior to filing for divorce. A voter registration card would also work, or a Florida resident can complete an affidavit or testify on your behalf.

 

How is time-sharing with children determined?
Here in Florida, both parents go into a divorce with equal rights concerning time-sharing with children. If the parents are able to create and agree on their own time-sharing schedule and parenting plan, the court will most likely approve the plan. If the parents cannot reach an agreement, the court will establish a plan that is in the best interests of the child.

 

Can the court change a parenting plan?
The courts recognize that the age of the child and many other circumstances might necessitate a modification to the original parenting plan. If the parents agree to the modification then the court will most likely allow that modification. It shows that the parents are working together to make sure their child’s needs are being met. If both parents can’t agree, the court will have to hold a hearing. If it’s in the best interest of the child and there is a substantial, unanticipated change of circumstances, then the modification most likely will be granted.

 

How is child support calculated?
Child support is calculated by a set formula based upon your gross income and certain monthly costs and expenses. Once you figure out your net income, the court will look at the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet to determine your exact payment based upon your individual income and the number of children you have.

 

What if I make child support payments for another child?
As long as you are actually paying that child support, the Florida courts will be able to take your payment amount into account when determining the child support for any other children.


What is the point of proving paternity?
If you are a single mother, proving that someone is the father of your child can help you to win child support benefits to help pay for their care. But there are benefits for fathers as well. You can gain the legal right to see your child and be a part of legal and medical decisions. You can offer benefits to your child that you otherwise wouldn’t be able to, such as putting them on your employer-sponsored insurance plan. And, if you wish, you can even attempt to gain custody.

 

How is spousal support or alimony determined?
Alimony is determined by the need of the spouse who is requesting alimony and the ability of the spouse who will be paying the alimony. The goal of alimony is to maintain the marital lifestyle the spouse has become accustomed to for a specific period of time. Numerous factors are taken into consideration, such as the length of the marriage, income, earning capacity, how each spouse contributes to the marriage, and others.

 

What does family law have to do with domestic violence?
When most people think about domestic violence, they think about a criminal lawyer defending an alleged perpetrator. But there are two sides to every domestic violence case. Survivors of domestic violence often turn to family lawyers to help them prove their case and move on from the fear that has been dominating their life.And family lawyers don’t just work with victims, either. Many people who have been accused of domestic violence turn to us because they want to clear their names while making sure that they are acting in the best interests of their families.

 

Should I hire a family lawyer?
While you can handle a divorce on your own, a Florida family lawyer can be a great asset in figuring out the best and easiest way to proceed. Every situation is different, and because of that, a family lawyer will be able to draw upon their experience and knowledge to give you the best advice and representation you need.


What is a family trust?

A family trust is a trust created to benefit persons who are related to one another by blood, affinity, or law.  When you set up a family trust you decide what will happen to your assets. A trustee is appointed and the trustee must follow specific instructions. When you set up a trust your family can avoid having to go through the court system to access your finances and assets if you ever become disabled. Back to Family Law FAQs

What is a guardian ad litem?

A Guardian Ad Litem (or "GAL") is an adult volunteer who is appointed by the court to represent the best interests of a child suspected to be the victim of abuse, neglect, or abandonment.

"A GAL establishes an ongoing relationship with a child (or group of siblings) and conducts a thorough investigation to determine what recommendations to make on the child's behalf in court. The GAL helps advocate for medical, mental health, educational or economic services needed to bring stability and wholeness to the child’s life, and acts as a monitor to see if court orders are carried out in a timely fashion." www.legalaidocba.org Back to Family Law FAQs

How do I change my name after marriage?

In All Florida Counties: A person who desires to change his or her name must file a petition in the chancery court in the county in which he or she resides. The petitioner must submit a copy of his/her fingerprints for a criminal background check, which is required before a hearing may be set.

In Orange County:  Name change packets may be purchased from the Clerk of Courts for $5.00, or requested by mail with payment and a self-addressed stamped envelope.
The address is:

Family Services
425 N. Orange Ave.
Room 320
Orlando, FL 32801

When filing for a Dissolution of Marriage, Paternity or Name Change at the courthouse you must first go to Room 330, Family Court Services, before 3:30 pm to have your pleadings reviewed and notarized.

The fee for a name change request in Orange County is $412.50.

Gathered from (www.myorangeclerk.com) Back to Family Law FAQs

What is dissolution of marriage?

Dissolution of Marriage is the official term for divorce in the State of Florida. Florida is a “no-fault” state, therefore one who petitions for dissolution need only show that the marriage is "irretrievably broken". There are two types of Dissolutions of Marriage in Florida:

Regular Dissolution of Marriage: Requires submitting a financial affidavit to the court and in some counties may require a couple to attend mediation. Although the couple is permitted to enter into a written agreement concerning property disposition, if no agreement is reached, a judge will hold a trial and make the final decision on contested issues.
Simplified Dissolution of Marriage: Certain couples are eligible to dissolve their marriage by way of a simplified procedure. This type of dissolution was designed so the services of an attorney may not be necessary. Couples are responsible, however, for filing all necessary documents correctly, and both parties are required to appear before a judge together when the final dissolution is granted. You can, however, retain an attorney to represent you even in an uncontested matter. The cost for such services is generally much less than in a contested case. A Simple dissolution form requires:
They both agree to the use of this form of dissolution proceeding
They have no minor (under 18) or dependent children
They have no adopted children under the age of 18
The wife is not pregnant
At least one of the parties has lived in Florida for the past six months
The parties have agreed on the division of all of their property (assets) and obligations (debts)
Neither party is seeking alimony; and
Both parties agree that the marriage is irretrievably broken.


CAN YOUR MARRIAGE BE SAVED?
Are you sure your marriage cannot be saved? Before you take any legal steps to end your marriage, you may consider possible ways to save it. You may wish to consult with a marriage counselor, psychologist, psychiatrist, minister, priest, rabbi or other professional. Many social and religious organizations offer counseling services at reasonable rates. Your family law attorney may refer you to someone who can counsel you individually or together with your spouse. Some counseling services are free, and some services are offered on a sliding-scale basis related to your ability to pay.

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
If you feel you are the victim of domestic violence, repeat violence or sexual violence, you can seek help from local law enforcement authorities and can ask the civil court to enter an injunction (sometimes called a “restraining order”).

You may go to civil court yourself (without an attorney) to petition for an injunction to protect yourself against domestic violence. “Domestic violence” means any assault, aggravated assault, battery, aggravated battery, sexual assault, sexual battery, stalking, aggravated stalking, kidnapping, false imprisonment or any criminal offense resulting in physical injury or death of one family or household member by another family or household member.

You may retain the services of an attorney to represent you in the domestic violence civil action if you so choose. You cannot request that the other party pay for the attorney’s fees, suit money or costs incurred on your behalf in the domestic violence proceeding, meaning you will be solely responsible for paying those fees and costs. There may be local legal aid programs and organizations that can provide legal assistance for free or at a reduced rate. For local legal aid organizations in your area, you may visit FloridaLawHelp.org or check The Florida Bar’s Legal Aid in Florida consumer pamphlet. Also, you should contact the office of the clerk of the circuit court in your county or a local domestic violence shelter for information.

OVERVIEW
In Florida, a divorce is called a “dissolution of marriage.”

Florida is one of the many states that have abolished fault as a ground for dissolution of marriage. The only requirement to dissolve a marriage is for one of the parties to prove that the marriage is “irretrievably broken.” Either spouse can file for the dissolution of marriage. You must prove that a marriage exists, one party has been a Florida resident for six months immediately preceding the filing of the petition, and the marriage is irretrievably broken. The reason for the irretrievable breakdown, however, may be considered under certain limited circumstances in the determination of alimony, equitable distribution of marital assets and debts, and the development of the parenting plan.

The parties, facts and circumstances in each case are unique; therefore, outcomes can differ from case to case. Outcomes in a dissolution of marriage include, among other things, the division of assets and debts, awards of spousal support, awards of child support, and decisions on parental responsibility and/or time-sharing schedules. There is no “one-size-fits-all” or “standard” dissolution of marriage in Florida.

The dissolution of marriage process can be highly emotional and traumatic for couples as well as their children. Spouses often do not know their legal rights and obligations. Court clerks and judges can answer some basic questions but cannot give legal advice. Only an attorney can provide legal advice. Statutory requirements and court rules must be strictly followed, or you may lose certain rights permanently. The Florida Bar recommends you obtain the services of Florida family law attorney concerning legal questions, which include discussions regarding your rights and responsibilities in a dissolution of marriage. A knowledgeable attorney can analyze your unique situation and help you make decisions in your and your children’s best interests.

COLLABORATIVE LAW
Those who wish to dissolve their marriage in an amicable manner with the assistance of trained professionals may wish to explore the collaborative dissolution process.

The collaborative practice of law is a voluntary dispute resolution process that can begin at any time before or after a party files a petition for dissolution of marriage with a court. In the collaborative practice of law, both parties and their attorneys sign a collaborative participation agreement that describes the nature and scope of the matter; the parties voluntarily disclose all relevant and material information; the parties use good faith efforts to negotiate; and the parties may engage joint neutral mental health and financial professionals to assist with their negotiations.

The goal of the collaborative process is for the parties to enter into a written settlement agreement that addresses all issues, which may include a parenting plan, division of their assets and debts, alimony, child support and attorney’s fees and costs. Should the collaborative process be unsuccessful in whole or in part, the parties must discharge the attorneys and other professionals and begin a contested dissolution proceeding through the court.

If you would like more information about the collaborative practice of family law, you should search for a collaboratively trained family law attorney near you.

DISSOLUTION PROCEEDINGS THROUGH THE COURT
There are two ways of filing in a Florida court for a dissolution of marriage. The most common way is called a “Regular Dissolution of Marriage.” The second method is the “Simplified Dissolution of Marriage.” Family Law Forms for dissolution, domestic violence and other related forms can be found at the Florida Courts’ website, http://www.flcourts.org/resources-and-services/court-improvement/problem-solving-courts/family-courts/family-law-forms.stml.

REGULAR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE
Beginning the court proceeding:

The regular dissolution process begins with a petition for dissolution of marriage, filed with the circuit court in the county where you and your spouse last lived together or in a county where either party resides. Either spouse may file for a dissolution of marriage. The petitioner must allege that the marriage is irretrievably broken. The petition sets out what the petitioner wants from the court. The other spouse must file an answer within 20 days of being served, addressing the matters in the initial petition, and can choose to include a counter-petition for dissolution of marriage raising any additional issues that spouse requests the court to address.

Automatic financial disclosure:

Court rules governing a dissolution of marriage require that each party provide certain financial documents and a completed financial affidavit to the other party within 45 days of the service of the petition or several days before any temporary hearing. Failure to provide this information can result in the court dismissing the case or not considering that party’s requests. The parties or the court can modify these requirements except for the filing of a financial affidavit, which is mandatory in all cases in which financial relief is sought. A child-support guidelines worksheet also must be filed with the court at or before any hearing on child support. This requirement may not be waived by the parties or the court.

Mediation:

Mediation is a procedure to assist you and your spouse in working out an arrangement for reaching an agreement without a protracted process or a trial. Its purpose is not to save a marriage but to help divorcing spouses reach a solution and arrive at agreeable terms for handling the break-up of the marriage. Many counties have public or court-connected mediation services available. Some counties require spouses to attempt mediation before a final hearing (also known as “trial”) can be set. To learn more about mediation, you may visit Florida Courts website: http://www.flcourts.org/resources-and-services/alternative-dispute-resolution/mediation.stml.

Formalizing settlement terms:

Some spouses agree on some or all of the issues before or after the petition is filed. Issues may include the division of property, a parenting plan, spousal support, child support or attorney’s fees. Parties who have reached an understanding as to their desired outcome(s) enter into a written agreement that is signed by both parties and then presented to the court. Parties who do not yet have a written agreement but have reached an understanding also may appear for a final hearing with a suggested settlement that they ask the court to accept and incorporate into a final judgment. In such uncontested cases, a dissolution of marriage can become final in a short amount of time.

Reaching an agreement empowers parties to create terms with which they are more likely to comply rather than leaving decisions up to a judge.

Contested final hearing:

Finally, some spouses cannot agree on all issues, so a final hearing (or “trial”) is required. Each party will present evidence and testimony to the judge during the final hearing, and then the judge makes the final decision on the contested issues.

SIMPLIFIED DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE
Brief overview:

Certain couples are eligible to dissolve their marriage by way of a simplified procedure. This type of dissolution was designed so the services of an attorney might not be necessary. Spouses are responsible, however, for filing all necessary documents correctly, and both parties are required to appear before a judge together when the final dissolution is granted.

Cost-saving measures:

You can retain an attorney to represent you even in an uncontested matter. The cost for such services is generally much less than in a contested case. You can further reduce your attorney’s fees if you ensure that you and your spouse have reached an agreement on all issues that would require the attorney’s work.

Eligibility requirements for simplified dissolution:

Not everyone can use the simplified procedure. Couples can use the simplified dissolution of marriage only if all the following requirements are met:

Both parties agree to the use of this form of dissolution proceeding.
They have no minor (under 18) or dependent children.
They have no adopted children under the age of 18.
Neither party is pregnant.
At least one of the parties has lived in Florida for the past six months.
The parties have agreed on the division of all of their property (assets) and obligations (debts).
Neither party is seeking alimony.
Both parties agree that the marriage is irretrievably broken.
If you and your spouse cannot meet all of the above requirements, you will have to follow the procedure of the regular dissolution of marriage process.

Differences between regular and simplified dissolution proceedings:

There are substantial differences between a simplified and a regular dissolution of marriage. In a regular dissolution, each spouse has the right to examine and cross-examine the other as a witness. Each spouse also has the ability to obtain documents concerning the other’s income, expenses, assets and debts before a trial or settlement. With a simplified dissolution, financial information may be requested by either party, but disclosing financial information is not required.

Obtaining the forms for simplified dissolution proceedings:

If spouses seek a dissolution and prefer to use the simplified form of dissolution, they should both contact the clerk of the circuit court in their county and obtain a copy of the booklet titled “Simplified Dissolution Information” for more detailed information and forms. Or visit the Florida Courts’ website provided above.

PARENTING PLAN CONSIDERATIONS
It is the public policy of Florida to ensure that each minor child has frequent and continuing contact with both parents after the parents have separated or the marriage is dissolved and to encourage parents to share the rights and responsibilities, and joys, of child-rearing. The court gives both parties the same consideration in determining parental responsibility and time-sharing, regardless of the child’s age or gender.

In most cases, parental responsibility for a minor child will be shared by both parents so that each retains full parental rights and responsibilities with respect to their child. Shared parenting requires both parents to confer so that major decisions affecting the welfare of the child will be determined jointly. You and your spouse may agree, or the court may order, that one parent have the ultimate responsibility over specific aspects of the child’s welfare, such as education, religion or medical and dental needs. The court will determine any or all of these matters if the parties cannot agree.

In very rare cases, the court can order sole parental responsibility to one parent. To do so, the court must determine that shared parental responsibility would be detrimental to the child.

In determining parental responsibility, the court will approve or devise its own Parenting Plan, which includes responsibility for the daily tasks of child-rearing, the time-sharing schedule, and decision-making authority relating to health care, school and related activities. The plan also will specify any technology that will be used for parent-child communication. The parents may agree on a Parenting Plan and submit it to the court for approval, or the court will determine these issues. The statute includes a list of factors for the court to consider in making these decisions.

The courts use the best-interests-of-the-child standard when considering parental issues.

Florida law requires both parties to attend a parenting course before entering a final dissolution of marriage. Some courts require children of parents going through dissolution of marriage to attend a class specifically designed for them. Consult your county clerk’s office for information on courses offered.

DIVISION OF ASSETS AND DEBTS
One of the most difficult and complex areas of dissolution of marriage is the division of assets and debts. Assets may include cars, houses, retirement benefits (pensions and 401(k) plans), business interests, cash, stocks, bonds, bank accounts, personal property and other things of value. Debts (also called “liabilities”) include mortgages, car loans, credit card accounts and other amounts of money you and your spouse owe to third parties.

There are two types of assets and debts in Florida – nonmarital and marital. Generally, any asset or debt acquired during the marriage is considered marital and subject to distribution. The parties also may have assets or debts that are considered nonmarital and should be awarded to only one party.

Florida statutes and case law provide for an “equitable distribution” of marital assets and debts. Although the court must begin with the presumption that all marital assets and debts are to be divided equally (50 percent each) between the parties, the court may distribute the marital estate fairly or equitably (not necessarily equally) between the parties, regardless of how title is held. A court decides equitable distribution before considering alimony. Equitable distribution is based on a long list of factors the court is required to consider.

Factors to be considered by the court include the contribution of each spouse to the marriage; the duration of the marriage; and the economic circumstances of each spouse. The court should approve your agreement if the court finds it to be reasonable. If you and your spouse cannot agree, the court will divide the assets and debts during trial.

ALIMONY
After equitable distribution, the court may consider an alimony award. The court may grant alimony to either spouse. For the court to award alimony, the requesting spouse must demonstrate a need for alimony and the ability of the other party to pay. Once the requesting spouse has established a need and an ability to pay, the court must determine all relevant factors to determine the property type and amount of alimony to award.

For purposes of determining alimony, there is a rebuttable presumption that a short-term marriage is a marriage having a duration of less than 7 years, a moderate-term marriage is a marriage having a duration of greater than 7 years but less than 17 years, and a long-term marriage is a marriage having a duration of 17 years or greater. The length of a marriage is the period of time from the date of marriage until the date of filing of an action for dissolution of marriage.

Bridge-the-gap alimony may be awarded to help a spouse make a transition from being married to being single. Bridge-the-gap alimony is designed to assist a spouse with legitimate, identifiable short-term needs. There are limits as to the length and conditions of a bridge-the-gap alimony award.

Rehabilitative alimony may be awarded to assist a spouse in establishing the capacity for self-support through either the redevelopment of previous skills or credentials, or the acquisition of education, training or work experience necessary to develop appropriate employment skills or credentials. The court must articulate a specific rehabilitative plan to award alimony so both parties clearly understand the expectations placed on the alimony recipient.

Durational alimony may be awarded when permanent periodic alimony is inappropriate. The purpose of durational alimony is to provide a spouse with economic assistance for a set period of time following a marriage of short or moderate duration or following a marriage of long duration if there is no ongoing need for support on a permanent basis. There are limitations as to the length and modifiability of a durational alimony award.

Permanent alimony may be awarded to provide for the needs and necessities of life as they were established during the marriage of the parties for a spouse who lacks the financial ability to meet the needs and necessities of life following a dissolution of marriage. There are limitations as to when a court may award permanent periodic alimony, particularly for marriages of short or moderate duration.

Some of the factors the court considers when determining the type and amount of the alimony award include, but are not limited to:

The parties’ prior standard of living.
Length of the marriage.
Age and physical and emotional condition of both spouses.
Each spouse’s financial resources and income-producing capacity of the assets they receive.
The time necessary to acquire sufficient education or training to find appropriate employment.
The services rendered in homemaking, child-rearing and the education and career-building of the other spouse.
The court may consider any other factor necessary to do equity and justice between the spouses.

You have the right to obtain information about your spouse’s income and assets through the use of discovery procedures. Discovery includes the exchange of documents and answers to written or oral questions.

TAX CONSIDERATIONS
There are important tax considerations in any dissolution of marriage, including the dependency deduction for children, taxability and deductibility of child support and alimony in their various forms, and effects of property transfers. Know the tax consequences of your settlement agreement before finalizing your dissolution of marriage. It may be too late after the signing of a marital settlement agreement or entry of a final judgment to correct mistakes that have been made. You may want to obtain the services of an accountant in conjunction with your attorney to become better informed about this part of the dissolution process.

CHILD SUPPORT
You and your spouse each have a responsibility to financially support your children in accordance with your income and their needs. Child support may be by direct payment or by indirect benefits, such as mortgage payments, insurance or payment of medical and dental expenses. Ordinarily, the obligation to support your child ends when that child reaches age 18, marries, is emancipated, joins the armed forces or dies.

Some of the issues concerning child support that must be considered include:

The amount of support.
The method of payment.
Ways to ensure payments are made.
When child support may be increased or decreased.
Who claims the dependency deduction for tax purposes.
Other questions may need to be answered, depending on the circumstances of your case. Guidelines for the amount of support apply to all cases and are based on the income of the parents and the number of children, with adjustments for substantial overnight contact.

If you have a problem receiving support payments from your spouse or former spouse, or the time-sharing plan is not being followed, you should bring this matter to the attention of the court. It is not legal to withhold time-sharing or child-support payments because either parent fails to pay court-ordered child support or violates the time-sharing schedule in the parenting plan.

RESTORATION OF FORMER NAME
Florida law permits the court to restore the former name of a spouse in a Final Judgment of Dissolution of Marriage. A spouse who desires restoration of a name must request it, normally within the original petition or a counter-petition for dissolution of marriage. The court can restore the spouse only to the name from immediately prior to the marriage. A spouse who wishes to change a name to anything other than the prior name normally has to take additional steps.

ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND COSTS
The fees and costs for dissolution of marriage cases vary widely. The more complex and the more contested the issues, the more the dissolution will cost. At an initial meeting, your attorney may be able to provide an estimate of the total cost of a dissolution based on the information you provide; however, keep in mind that your attorney has no way to predict the future and that estimates are precisely that – estimates. The final cost of your dissolution of marriage will depend on many variables that are unpredictable.

Your attorney will expect you to pay a fee and the costs of litigation in accordance with the agreement you make. Sometimes the court will order your spouse to pay part or all of your fee and costs, but such awards are unpredictable and cannot be relied upon. You are primarily responsible for the payment of your legal fees.

In a dissolution of marriage, it is illegal for an attorney to work on a contingency fee basis (that is, where the attorney’s fee is based upon a percentage of the amount awarded to the client).

APPEALS
If you feel the judge’s decision was incorrect, you may appeal that decision, provided that certain time-sensitive procedural steps are followed. An appellate court does not, however, often reverse a trial judge’s decision, because the judge has broad discretion in dissolution of marriage cases. If the trial judge makes an error of law or there is an abuse of discretion, the appellate court may reverse the decision. The success of your appeal will be limited if your only reason for appeal is displeasure with the judge’s decision. You must decide quickly whether to appeal the final judgment, because an appeal must be filed within 30 days from the date that the order you are appealing is filed in the lower tribunal or court, or 30 days from the date that an order on a motion tolling the time to appeal is filed.

WHERE TO GET LEGAL HELP
A good place to begin is with your own attorney, who can give you a quick review of your legal rights and advise you how to proceed. If your attorney does not handle dissolution of marriage cases, you might be referred to a family law attorney.

If, however, your preferred attorney has been retained by your spouse, then that same attorney cannot also represent you. In fact, if the attorney has been your family attorney, there may be a conflict of interest meaning the attorney cannot represent either of you. Do not attempt to consult with your spouse’s attorney to receive legal advice. It is unethical for an attorney to represent both parties in a dissolution action and to give legal advice to both spouses.

HOW TO SELECT AN ATTORNEY
If you do not have an attorney, an attorney referral service, usually operated by a local bar association, can put you in touch with an attorney who handles such cases.

If you do not have an attorney referral service in your city, The Florida Bar’s Lawyer Referral Service can locate an attorney for you. You can call the statewide service, toll-free, at (800) 342-8011, or you can view the Attorney Search section on The Florida Bar Family Law Section’s website at http://familylawfla.org/resources/.

If you are looking for an attorney to represent you in a dissolution of marriage – or any other legal matter – The Florida Bar has developed a consumer pamphlet “How To Find A Lawyer in Florida,” which may be helpful. For instructions on ordering this and other consumer pamphlets, go to:  https://www.floridabar.org/public/consumer/ .

One of the toughest parts of going through a divorce or facing a family law matter is not knowing what is going to happen. Unanswered questions can lead to many stressful days and sleepless nights.

In the hopes of easing  your trepidations, below is a list of commonly asked questions with answers about family law in Florida:

Who Gets The Kids In A Florida Divorce?
Florida law is dedicated to doing what is in the best interest of the child. In most cases, that means creating child custody (also known as time sharing) arrangements that allow the child to have a continued relationship with each parent. While each parent may not spend equal time with the child, each parent should play an active role in the child's upbringing.

Who Gets The Property In A Florida Divorce?
In Florida, property is to be divided equitably. Equitable means fair. Fair does not always mean equal. While a 50-50 division of property is a good starting point, the balance may be shifted based on a number of factors that should be taken into consideration. These factors include the age, income level and earning capacity of each spouse.

How Long Does A Florida Divorce Take?
The divorce timeframe will depend on whether you and your spouse can reach agreements. An uncontested divorce, which is a divorce in which there are no issues in dispute, might be finalized in a month or so with the help of an efficient lawyer. If there are disputes over property division, child custody or any other issue, extra time will be needed. Are you and your spouse able to negotiate an outcome? If not, and the case must be taken to trial, it is possible for the process to take up to a year or more, depending on how taxed the courts are.

Will My Case Go To Trial?
Most divorce and family law cases do not go to trial. With a skilled attorney on your side, you may be able to resolve disputes without the need for a battle in court. In fact, trial should be avoided if possible, because it takes the decision-making power out of your hands and puts them in the hands of a judge who has never met you before. However, you should choose an attorney who is competitive and willing to fight, one who has spent time in the courtroom and understands how to argue in front of a judge, in case trial becomes necessary.

How Much Will It Cost?
There are fees involved in divorce and family law cases that are standard, but much of the cost depends on the lawyer you choose. At our law firm, we put a lot of care into making certain our clients feel they are receiving effective representation at a fair price. We are clear and upfront about our fees and billing methods, and some services are available on a flat-fee basis. We do not over bill, and we are not motivated to run up the bill. We are motivated to get you through this emotional process so you can move on with your life.

Do I Need An Attorney For My Family Law Matter?
Ultimately, you are the only one who can decide whether you need an attorney. Family law is complex. There are many nuances, not only in the law books, but in terms of how the law is practiced in the courtroom on a daily basis. Without knowledge of those nuances, you run the risk of making errors that could cost you time and money, and possibly worse yet you may miss opportunities that would have led to a more positive outcome.

-219-4561 to speak with one of our experienced family law attorneys.

I’m worried that if I file for divorce, my spouse will freeze me out of the bank account or cancel my credit cards. What can I do?
The judge handling your divorce can issue temporary orders regarding child custody and the payment of support, directing use of the family home, and ordering the parties not to make any significant changes to the family finances, such as selling a home or car, making a major purchase, or opening or closing any bank accounts or cancelling credit cards. The idea is to maintain the status quo until a final decision is reached in the divorce. If you have any particular concerns regarding property, finances, custody or support, talk to your attorney, and he or she will make sure these concerns are addressed by the judge though enforceable, temporary court orders.

Does the husband always have to pay alimony in a divorce?
First of all, alimony is not automatic and is only awarded if one party requests it and the judge decides it is warranted. Second, the court could require either the husband or the wife to pay alimony. Several factors go into determining whether alimony should be awarded and if so, for how long. These factors include:

The length of the marriage
The standard of living enjoyed by the couple during the marriage
The earning capacity and financial resources of each party
How the court divides the marital property
The contribution of each party to the marriage in areas such as working, household management or taking care of the children while the other spouse worked or went to school
Whether requesting or challenging an alimony award, it is important to have strong, effective legal representation from an experienced attorney who can present a valid, persuasive case to the judge in support of your position.

Is alimony forever? How long does alimony last?
There are different types of alimony. A permanent alimony award may be considered appropriate after a long-term marriage to allow a non-working spouse to maintain the same standard of living established during the marriage. Other types of alimony may be granted in one lump sum or over a certain period of time to ease the transition from married life to single life or to enable a non-working spouse to gain education or job skills. Alimony of this type is usually granted according to a written plan that shows how much alimony will be needed and for how long.

Can I move and take the kids with me if I have primary custody?
Neither parent should move out of state or a significant distance away without first talking to an attorney. A move-away may require a modification of the parenting plan and timesharing arrangement, which requires approval by the court and a determination that the relocation and modification will be in the child’s best interests.

What does a prenuptial agreement do?
A prenuptial agreement, also known as a premarital agreement, is a legal contract that can be signed by a couple who are going to be married. The prenuptial agreement can set out how certain matters will be handled in the event the couple later separates or divorces, or in the event of the death of one of the spouses. Usually, the prenuptial agreement addresses the division of property and the payment of alimony or spousal support. If the couple does later divorce, the terms of the prenuptial agreement decide these matters, and the parties do not have to go to court and fight over them. A few issues cannot be addressed in a prenuptial agreement, such as any provision that would negatively affect child support.

Prenuptial agreements are generally favored where there is a large disparity in the assets or income between the couple. The wealthier spouse wants to know that the wealth he or she has worked so hard to obtain will be protected, and the less wealthy spouse wants assurance that he or she will be adequately taken care of in the event of a divorce or separation. The prenuptial agreement can accomplish both goals. An attractive feature of the prenuptial agreement is that it is a private, confidential document, and the terms of the divorce do not need to be disclosed to other family members, the media or the general public. A legal divorce proceeding, on the other hand, is a public proceeding, and matters discussed in open court are a matter of public record for anyone to see.

Prenups are also often used where one or both of the prospective spouses has been married before and been through a difficult divorce. The prenuptial agreement lets them enter into marriage without the worry that there could be another tough legal battle looming ahead or that one would get taken advantage of in the event the marriage doesn’t work out.

What are the grounds for divorce in Florida?
There are two grounds for divorce, formally referred to as “dissolution of marriage”: irreconcilable differences and mental incapacity of the other party. If mental incapacity is alleged, the party alleged incapacitated must have been adjudicated incapacitated for a period of three years prior to filing for dissolution of marriage.

What is a divorce going to cost me? Can I afford it?
It is very difficult to say how much your divorce will cost due to all of the variables in a particular case. You and your attorney should discuss the different variables in every case generally and in your case specifically. Whether you can afford an attorney will depend, of course, on your income and assets and whether you would be entitled to an award of attorney’s fees paid by your spouse.

Do I really need to hire a Florida divorce attorney?
Divorce laws can be complex and even counter-intuitive. You need the advice of an experienced family lawyer to discuss the particular issues in your case and the corresponding laws regarding each issue to fully understand your financial exposure to alimony and child support, the equitable distribution of your assets and debts and whether those assets and debts could be unequally divided, and the factors the court considers when establishing a parenting plan for your children.

Does Florida grant divorces based on marital fault?
Florida is a no-fault state.

Can I get spousal support or will I have to provide spousal support to my ex?
The law regarding spousal support includes many factors the court considers when determining if a spouse is entitled to support, what type of support, and how much to award. You need to speak to an experienced family lawyer and discuss the facts in support of your claim for support or exposure to paying support to your spouse.

Can I change my name at the time of divorce?
The wife can ask the court to restore her maiden name as long as the request is not an attempt to commit fraud, any criminal or illegal activity, or for the purpose of filing or related to any bankruptcy proceedings.

Can I get an annulment in Florida?
An annulment makes it so the marriage never occurred. Annulments are rare in family law. There are no specific statutes in Florida that govern annulment and the court falls back on existing case law to make a decision. The grounds must involve grievous misrepresentations by one spouse to another. Examples include fraud, duress, consanguinity (you learned after the wedding that you are related to him or her by blood), or impotence. Impotence means that one party is incapable of having sex, and it should not be confused with an inability to procreate. You should discuss the particular facts of your case that cause you to believe an annulment is possible with an experienced family lawyer.

When can I file for divorce in Florida?
In order for the court to have subject-matter jurisdiction to enter dissolution of marriage, one of the parties must reside in the state of Florida for six months before the filing of the petition for dissolution of marriage and must have the intent to remain a resident of Florida at the time of filing. Once you have lived in Florida for the requisite period of time, and you have a ground for divorce, you can file for divorce.

How long does it take to get a divorce in Florida?
There are a lot of variables that effect how long a case will take. It is important to choose an experienced family lawyer to aggressively move your case forward while ensuring competent and comprehensive representation.

Do I have to go to court?
In most jurisdictions, the only time you will have to go to court will be to attend a case management conference. A case management conference is held so the court can be informed as to the status of the case and make orders moving the case forward. The majority of divorce cases settle at mediation. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement at mediation, the case will be scheduled for trial. During the course of a case, other issues may arise that need court intervention such as non-compliance with the exchange of documents and information.

If attempts to serve my spouse do not work, what is my next step?
If you are unable to serve your spouse, you can ask the court for the ability to perfect service by publication. The court will require that you use due diligence to locate your spouse prior to allowing service by publication.

At what point during the process can a spouse remarry or start dating?
You must wait until the court enters a Final Judgment of Dissolution of Marriage before you can remarry. There are no Florida laws regarding when you can start dating. However, if children are involved, there may be strategic reasons why you should not. You should discuss this issue with your attorney prior to deciding to date.

What if my spouse does not want the divorce?
There is a Florida statute that gives the court the authority to abate the proceedings and order the parties to 90 days of marital counseling. This statute is rarely invoked because if one of the parties truly believes that the marriage is irretrievably broken and marital counseling will not help, the court is likely to find that the marriage is irretrievably broken.

Do the other issues – child support, child custody, alimony, and property – have to be decided before the divorce is final?
Not necessarily, but most likely. The court can bifurcate a case and divorce the parties prior to ruling on the other issues, but only in very extraordinary circumstances such as when one of the parties is terminally ill and likely to pass away prior to adjudication on the issues in the case.

After I file for divorce, do I have to continue to live in Florida?
No, but Florida will retain jurisdiction over your case.

What if I am in the military and out of state?
If you are in the military, there are special laws that provide guidance to where divorces can be filed. You will need to discuss your particular relationship to Florida with an experienced family lawyer to ascertain if Florida is the proper state in which to file.

What forms do I need to file for a divorce in Florida?
You will need a Civil Case Cover Sheet, Petition for Dissolution of Marriage, Notice of Social Security, and Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Enforcement Act Affidavit (if there are children born of the marriage) to file for divorce. There are other mandatory financial disclosure documents that need to be filed during the case.

How and where is a divorce complaint filed?
The Petition for Dissolution of Marriage and accompanying documents are filed at the family law courthouse in the jurisdiction where you and your spouse last lived as husband and wife. The documents are generally taken to the courthouse by the process server who asks the clerk of court to file the documents and issue a summons. Once the summons has been issued and documents filed, the process server will personally serve all the documents on your spouse.

How do I serve the divorce complaint on my spouse?
You must hire a process server or sheriff to serve the Petition for Dissolution of Marriage and accompanying documents.

How is a divorce granted? Will I have to go to court?
You will have to go to court if you are the petitioner and prove the residency requirements and grounds for divorce if all of the issues in the case have been agreed upon by the parties and memorialized in writing in a Marital Settlement Agreement. If the parties have not settled all of the issues, the court will make rulings on the issues and then grant the divorce.

What typically happens if I go to court to obtain my divorce myself?
A person representing his or herself (called a pro se litigant) will have to become familiar with state procedural laws and circuit court procedural rules to obtain a divorce. What typically happens is that the pro se litigant will learn the procedural rules by first not following proper procedure, which is extremely time-consuming and frustrating. Having an experienced family lawyer will ensure that proper procedures are followed for expedient adjudication of your case.

At any time can a parent change a minor child’s last name without the other parent’s permission?
No, a parent must have the Petition for Change of Name personally served on the other parent.

Can a couple become legally married by living together as man and wife under the state’s laws (common law marriage)?
There is no common law marriage in Florida.

How to Talk to Your Kids About Divorce
Many unhappy couples try to keep their relationship together for the sake of their children. However, staying in an unhappy marriage may actually cause more harm because it may inevitably result in an unhealthy household for parents and their children. There is research to support the idea that children may benefit more... Read more


I am Going Through a Divorce...Who gets the Pet?
We don't usually think of them as property, as caring for pets is very much like caring for our children. It is commonplace for our clients to ask about their pets and for them to be concerned about their well-being while a divorce is pending. Unfortunately pets can often be used in a divorce as a bargaining chip and as leverage... Read more


How much does it cost to file for divorce? Do court costs and filing fees differ in contested and uncontested divorce cases?
Filing fees are set forth in the Florida Statutes and the current fee for the filing of a divorce case is $408.00. The filing fee for contested and uncontested divorce cases is the same. Additional costs may be associated with the filing of a contested divorce, however, including fees for service of process, mediation, and the “Parent Education and Family Stabilization” course.


Where can I find information about Florida’s “Parent Education and Family Stabilization” courses?
Parties are required by §61.21, Florida Statutes, to attend a “Parent Education and Family Stabilization” course, which must be completed prior to entry of the final judgment of dissolution of marriage. The course may be taken online or in a local class and information is available online, through the Clerk of Court, or from our offices. The course is approximately four hours long and must be approved by the Department of Children and Families. At the end of the completed course, you will be issued a certificate of completion, which must be filed in your divorce case.


Must I hire an attorney to represent me in my divorce case?
It is not required that you hire a Orlando divorce attorney and you may choose to represent yourself. Florida offers self-help family law forms both online and in the office of your local courthouse. Such forms can appear deceptively simple, however, particularly where certain issues may be contested; often we see clients who initially attempted to represent themselves hoping to save money, only to spend substantially more money in the long run. Particularly if you have minor children and/or real property, your final judgment of dissolution of marriage will govern numerous complicated issues including division of real property, personal property and debts, child custody, support and time-sharing, alimony, health care, taxes and more. An experienced family law attorney can ensure that your divorce is handled properly and efficiently. Contact our office today to discuss payment options we can offer to those on all types of budgets.


Can I relocate with my children out of state before or during a divorce?
Upon filing for divorce in Orange or Osceola County, Florida, you and your spouse will immediately be subject to a standing temporary Administrative Order No. 2004-05-03, which precludes you from changing the residence of your children from the school zone in which the marital home is currently located without written agreement of both parties or an order of the court. Section 61.13001, F.S., governs relocation with a child, whether before, during or after divorce. The statute defines relocation as a move of at least fifty (50) miles from the marital residence, and for at least sixty (60) consecutive days (not including a temporary absence for purposes of vacation, education, or for the health care for the child). Under the statute, if no order as to residency of the child has previously been entered, the parties may enter into a written agreement permitting relocation so long as the agreement satisfies the statutory mandates. If a divorce has been filed or an order has previously been entered as to time-sharing, the relocation order must be ratified by the court. In the absence of an agreement between the parties, the parent wishing to relocate must notify the other parent of the proposed relocation as required by the statute. The other parent may object, but must do so prior to the deadline set forth in the statute. If an objection is filed, the party wishing to relocate must obtain court permission prior to relocating. Attempting to relocate without complying with the statutory notice and other requirements can subject the offending party to contempt, an order for return of the child, and other consequences. If permanent relocation is permitted, upon a finding of best interests of the child, the court will enter a new order governing time-sharing, including additional access, visitation, telephone, internet, webcam, the allocation of travel costs, and other arrangements necessary to ensure frequent and meaningful contact with the non-relocating parent. If you are considering relocating prior to filing for divorce, keep in mind that you will have to meet the residency requirements (generally three to twelve months) of your new home state in order to be eligible to file. Every case is different, but if you are going to move more than an hour’s drive away, you will probably need either your spouse’s consent or the judge’s permission. For more information about relocating with your child after divorce read our article "Child Custody and Relocation: What to Consider".


Am I entitled to alimony?
Florida’s alimony statute is found at § 61.08, F.S. Either party in a marriage may be entitled to some form of alimony. Florida courts have long recognized three types of alimony: Bridge-the-Gap (transitional short-term alimony which cannot exceed two years and cannot be modified), Rehabilitative (a stated plan to assist a spouse in acquiring education, training or work experience to develop employment skills or credentials), and Permanent ... Read more


Can I stay in my home during the divorce?
In 2010, statistics showed that 67% of the time when parents first separate, children remained in the marital home with the mother. Whether you stay in your home during a divorce depends on the particular facts of your situation. In Florida, if you and your spouse jointly own your home as tenants by the entireties, the house is a marital asset and neither you nor your spouse would be abandoning any rights to the property by moving out during the divorce proceedings. If you decide to stay in the house during your divorce, you may potentially receive assistance from your spouse, including receipt of child support or alimony, to help offset mortgage payments and other home related expenses. However, you will still have an obligation as a co-owner of the property to help contribute to the monthly payments and upkeep of a jointly owned home. It should be noted that pursuant to § 61.075(1)(h), F.S., in contemplating an unequal distribution of the parties’ assets, the court may consider one spouse’s desire to retain the marital home as a residence for any dependent child of the marriage, or any other party, when it would be equitable to do so. The court must first determine if it would be in the best interest of the dependent child to remain in the marital home; and, if not, whether other equities would be served by giving any other party exclusive use and possession of the marital home. If the court finds it to be in the best interest of the child or that party, and it is financially feasible for the parties to maintain the residence until the child is emancipated or until exclusive possession is otherwise terminated by a court order, you could be permitted to remain in the home even after the divorce is final. Your attorney can best advise you on such matters after reviewing the specific facts in your case.


What happens where my spouse and I started a business during our marriage and we are now contemplating divorce?
In Florida, the equitable distribution of assets in a divorce is governed by § 61.075, F.S. As a general rule, property acquired by the parties during the course of their marriage, including a business begun during the marriage, will be divided equally unless the court determines, after considering certain statutory factors, that some justification exists for an unequal distribution between the parties. While a business acquired or begun during the marriage is generally a marital asset, a company begun during the marriage using solely non-marital funds, may be determined to be a non-marital asset and may not be subject to equitable distribution. At least one Florida court has held, furthermore, that it was error for a trial court to order parties to remain co-owners of a business and to continue to work together after the dissolution if they did not wish to do so. See Manolakos v. Manolakos, 871 So.2d 258 (Fla. 4th DCA 2004). Pursuant to § 61.075(1)(f), the court may consider a spouse’s desire to retain his or her interest in or ownership of a jointly-owned business, corporation, or professional practice, intact and free from any claim or interference by the other spouse. The court must also consider, however, the contribution during the marriage of both spouses to the acquisition, enhancement, production of income, improvement of, or incurring of liabilities to, such a jointly-owned business. See § 61.075(1)(g). In valuing a business for purposes of equitable distribution, the court must calculate fair market value by measuring the value of the business’ tangible assets (including book value, accounts receivables, physical assets and liabilities), any enhancement in the value of the assets during the marriage, and the value of goodwill (the transferable likelihood of increased earnings). If marital funds or the efforts of the parties were used to enhance the value of the business, this enhanced value would also become a marital asset subject to equitable distribution. Even though a spouse may not be the key decision-maker in a business, if spousal efforts contribute to a closely held corporation’s overall success, the appreciation is a marital asset to be considered by the court. Keep in mind, however, that corporate assets may not be awarded to a spouse without joining the corporation as a party to the dissolution of marriage proceedings. Porcaro v. Porcaro, 531 So.2d 407 (Fla. 2d DCA 1988). Valuing and dividing a business acquired or begun during a marriage can be tricky. If you are contemplating divorce and have questions regarding your rights and interests in a jointly owned or family business, it is imperative that you contact an attorney experienced in both family and business law matters. Our highly experienced Central Florida divorce attorneys are available to answer your questions; call us to today at 407-426-6999 to schedule a consultation.


What should I do if my spouse becomes violent?
If you or your child have been hurt or injured and need immediate assistance, call 911. Domestic violence is a pattern of behavior, whether physical, emotional, sexual, psychological, or economic, used by abusers to get and to keep control in their relationships. While domestic violence can occur against a child, a parent, an elderly person or other family member, it is most often seen between spouses or those involved in intimate relationships, past or present. If you are a victim of domestic violence, there are a number of programs in Florida to assist you. To find a program serving your area call the toll-free Florida Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-500-1119 or 1-800-621-4202 (TTY) or go online to www.fcadv.org. Another website which offers helpful information is: www.dcf.state.fl.us. If you need a safe place to stay or are in need of advice and support, contact your local center for victims of domestic violence. Your local center can provide you with outreach services; all services are confidential and will be provided at no cost to you or your family. The advocates in these centers are trained to provide you with assistance and referrals for issues including housing, finances, legal, and health-care questions. If you wish to file for a restraining order or injunction, you should contact the clerk of court or an attorney to assist you. A temporary domestic violence restraining order can be issued by the court in a matter of hours pursuant to § 741.30, F.S. The Florida Attorney General’s Office can also refer you to crime victim programs which can provide confidential relocation for yourself and your family. For further information call 1-800-226-6667 or go to http://myfloridalegal.com/victims. The attorneys and staff at The Roberts Family Law Firm are also available at any time to help you in obtaining confidential assistance and support – your safety is our primary concern. Please contact us today at 407-426-6999 for advice and legal counseling in any matters concerning domestic violence.


How will our debts be handled during the divorce?
Marital debts, like marital assets, will be divided according to the law on equitable distribution as set forth in § 61.075, F.S. Marital debts include liabilities incurred during the marriage, whether individually by either spouse or jointly by both. Non-marital debts include liabilities incurred by either party prior to the marriage. Parties in an uncontested proceeding who divide their debts between themselves may enter into a Property Settlement Agreement which will be incorporated into the final judgment of their divorce. In a contested proceeding where parties are unable to reach an agreement on their own, the court will set apart each party’s non-marital debts and will distribute their marital debts in a judgment or order containing written factual findings based on competent substantial evidence. The cut-off date for determining the identification or classification of marital debts is the earlier of the date the parties enter into a valid separation agreement, such other date as may be expressly established by such agreement, or the date the petition for dissolution is filed. The date for determining the amount of marital debts is the date or dates as the judge determines is just and equitable under the specific circumstances. Please be aware that even if you are not held in your divorce to be legally responsible for all or part of a joint debt, your credit card company or other creditor may still seek to collect the debt from you.


Can I list our home for sale during a divorce?
No. The marital home may not be listed for sale during a divorce in the absence of an agreement signed by both parties or by order of the court. Upon filing for divorce in Orange or Osceola County, Florida, you and your spouse will immediately be subject to a standing temporary Administrative Order No. 2004-05-03, which precludes you from disposing of any asset, marital or non-marital. You will furthermore be precluded from adding any additional mortgage or from failing to take care of the home during the pendency of the divorce.


During a divorce, can I spend the money from a bank account where the account is in my name only?
Generally speaking, during a divorce you may spend the money from a bank account which is titled in your name only. If you file for divorce in Orange or Osceola County, immediately upon filing the petition, you will be subject to a standing temporary Administrative Order No. 2004-05-03 which allows parties to “spend their incomes in the ordinary course of their personal and family affairs.” Please be aware, however, that you will be required to account for the use of such funds or income from the time of separation. The use of such funds and income must be justified “as reasonable and necessary for the necessities of the party or to preserve marital assts or pay marital debts.” Both parties will be accountable for all money or property in their possession both during the marriage and after separation.


If my spouse and I divorce, will I have to split my retirement plan with my spouse?
Section 61.076, F.S. governs the distribution of pension or retirement assets in a dissolution of marriage. Generally pension rights (whether vested or unvested) and other retirement benefits (including profit-sharing, annuity, deferred compensation, and insurance plans or programs) are considered to be marital assets and will be divided between the parties equally subject to equitable distribution. Such assets, like other marital assets, maybe be distributed differently if the court finds a justification for an unequal distribution based on relevant factors as set forth in the equitable distribution statute, § 61.075, F.S. Please keep in mind that significant fees and tax penalties can be incurred for the early withdrawal of such funds. Your attorney can best advise you on such matters after reviewing the particular facts in your case.


Must I keep my spouse on my health insurance plan during a divorce?
There are many things to consider during divorce, and maintaining health insurance coverage should be a priority, especially if children are involved. Often, one spouse has health insurance through his or her employer and the other spouse and children are covered under a family plan. Although a non-primary spouse may be permitted to remain on a family policy during divorce proceedings, after the divorce, the former spouse is no longer eligible to remain on the same health insurance policy and will be dropped by the insurance company. While your health insurance company may permit you to drop your spouse during divorce proceedings, please be aware that if you file for divorce in Orange or Osceola County you will be subject to a standing temporary Administrative Order No. 2004-05-03, which will preclude you from changing any insurance policies except by written agreement signed by both parties or order of the court. Upon your divorce, your spouse may be eligible for COBRA coverage (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act). COBRA is a federal law which provides health insurance to anyone going through a divorce or legal separation from an employee that is currently covered by a health plan through a private-sector employer with 20 or more employees, employee organizations, or state or local governments. A former spouse wishing to take advantage of COBRA must contract the primary spouse’s health plan administrator within sixty days of the divorce. COBRA is expensive, however, and expires after 36 months or upon remarriage. For additional information you may contact EBSA at 1.866.444.EBSA (3272) or contact our Central Florida divorce attorneys in Orlando for an initial consultation!



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON FLORIDA DIVORCE LAW
Our Questions and Answers page is designed to respond to some of your basic questions about Florida divorce law. These questions and answers are provided as general information only. They are not intended to be relied upon for legal advice. You should always consult an attorney directly for definitive legal advice based upon the unique facts of your case.

WHAT HAPPENS TO MY CHILDREN IN A FLORIDA DIVORCE?
Either “shared parental responsibility” or “sole parental responsibility” will be determined in all Florida divorces where minor children are involved. In most cases this is by agreement of the parties but in others, the Court may make this decision after hearing each parent’s testimony and more often than not, after hearing the recommendation of a well qualified child psychologist. Shared parental responsibility is appropriate when both parents are fit and proper to share decision-making and appropriate care for the children. Sole parental responsibility is rare but may be appropriate when one of the parents is unfit.

Under shared parental responsibility, both parents have a right to share in the rights and responsibilities of parenting. Each has the right to participate in major decisions affecting the children. The children should not be used as instruments of vengeance or placed in the middle, either during or after the divorce. Parental conflict over and around the children can be exceptionally damaging to your children and to your post-divorce parenting relationship.

At the very beginning of the divorce, decisions need to be made about how your children’s time is divided between mom’s home and dad’s home. If you and your spouse cannot agree, the Judge will decide these matters at a hearing, but this is only a last resort after attempts to arrive at a compromise have failed.

Under Florida divorce law the Court has the power to appoint a highly qualified, highly professional custody evaluator to evaluate the entire family to determine a parenting plan in the best interests of your children. In many instances, we will request this action to assist in fashioning a timesharing schedule, given the unique facts of your case, to make sure you are heard and to reduce the “he said vs she said” acrimony.

In order to prevent psychological harm to the children of divorcing parents, no minor child’s deposition can be taken nor can the child be brought to a deposition. Further, without an order of the court based upon very compelling reasons, no minor child can be subpoenaed to appear at a hearing as a witness or brought to a court hearing.

HOW ARE FAMILY BILLS PAID DURING THE DIVORCE PROCESS?
During the marriage, the income of both spouses is frequently used to support the family home and lifestyle if that has been the case historically. When divorce commences, you and your spouse typically separate and two households must be maintained on the same income. It is crucial that you speak to your attorney early after this occurs to make sure you are not paying too much or receiving too little based on your circumstances since the early months after separation can set a precedent for the rest of the case and thereafter.

HOW IS CHILD SUPPORT CALCULATED IN FLORIDA?
Under Florida divorce law, the court may order either or both parents to pay an amount necessary for the support of the minor children of the marriage. Florida has established child support guidelines to calculate child support. The guidelines are determined by the income of the parents, and other factors. Other elements of child support include:

The cost of health insurance for the children;
The cost of day care or after school care expenses, where appropriate; and
Under certain circumstances, the cost of private school.
We will help you calculate how much will be paid or received in child support based upon these guidelines.

Under Florida law, child support normally terminates when your child graduates from high school even if your child is 18 years old before he or she graduates, as long as graduation occurs before age 19. If a child is physically or mentally dependent, child support can be required to continue after the age of majority. Child support does not include the expenses of a college education. The parties may agree to contribute to these expenses, but the Court cannot require financial responsibilities for your children after they graduate from high school. The court also cannot order automatic cost of living increases in child support unless the parties agree to such terms.

Child support is always modifiable upon proof of a substantial change in financial circumstances that meet certain requirements under Florida law.

WILL I PAY OR RECEIVE ALIMONY IN MY DIVORCE?
Temporary Support (alimony): During a Florida divorce, the higher income-earning spouse may be required to contribute to the temporary and on-going support of the other spouse. This may or may not have an impact on the final resolution of this issue, but it is important that you not pay too much or receive too little during the early stages of your divorce.

Alimony: Florida law allows for several different types of alimony: permanent; rehabilitative; transitional; bridge-the-gap; and lump sum alimony. Alimony for support is designed to provide the recipient spouse with funds sufficient to continue living a lifestyle consistent with that of the marriage. The length of the marriage and the disparity between the incomes of the Husband and Wife are two of the several factors that will determine the type of alimony, if any, in each case. Rehabilitative alimony is designed to provide support to a spouse for the period of time necessary to complete education or training sufficient for that spouse to earn income similar to that enjoyed prior to his or her termination of employment for various reasons, such as raising children. Your attorney will discuss with you the various forms of alimony, your rights and risks regarding alimony.

WHAT IS EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION?
“Marital property” will be equitably divided between you and your spouse when your marriage is dissolved. While there is a legal presumption that “equitable” means “equal”, there are instances when a disproportionate distribution favoring one party or the other, may be more fair. Under equitable distribution, you will end up with a post-divorce estate of similar value to your spouse’s rather than a joint owner of each asset.

WHAT IS MARITAL PROPERTY?
Marital property is any asset acquired during your marriage from marital labor or marital income, usually up to the date of the filing of the divorce. This includes, but is not limited to: houses, land, businesses, retirement accounts, stocks and stock options, bonds, notes receivable, assets held in trusts or partnerships, airplanes, boats, cars, investments, the contents of your home, gifts from or to your spouse, jewelry, collections, etc.

WHEN DIVIDING PROPERTY IN A DIVORCE, DOES IT MATTER WHOSE NAME IS ON THE TITLE?
Whether your name is on the title of the property is not the measure of whether an asset is marital for purposes of property division. But it may be relevant in determining whether a non-marital asset has become marital in nature.

WHAT IS NON-MARITAL PROPERTY UNDER FLORIDA DIVORCE LAW?
For purposes of property division in a Florida divorce, non-marital property generally falls into three categories. It includes anything that you or your spouse:

Owned prior to the marriage and has been maintained as separate property during the marriage;
Received at any time during your marriage as a gift from a third party or by inheritance and has been maintained as separate property;
Earned by or received from marital labor after the divorce papers are filed.
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF A FORENSIC ACCOUNTANT (CPA) IN A DIVORCE?
A forensic accountant, usually a Certified Public Accountant (CPA), is one of the team members you or your attorney may retain to value assets, to locate missing assets or income. An accountant may also calculate your historical standard of living for the alimony amount or determine your or your spouse’s ability to meet (or restrictions upon your ability to provide) alimony requested; or to determine the tax consequences of various alimony and equitable distribution scenarios. A CPA who is also a valuation expert may assist in valuing your or your spouse’s interest in a closely held business. We only retain independent, highly credible, qualified experts as they are a reflection on you as well as on our firm.

WHAT SHOULD I DO TO GET READY FOR MY DIVORCE?
To prepare for a Florida divorce, we recommend that you gather documents about what you own (assets), what you owe (liabilities), and about your and your spouse’s income, preferably the last three years tax returns. You might obtain a credit report to determine which obligors view you as an obligee in case your spouse signed your name on a credit card without your knowledge. Obtain copies of a full year’s worth of bank statements and canceled checks, investment account statements, credit card statements, applications for loans, and other important papers documenting assets, expenses and the flow of income over the last year. Prepare a “draft” financial statement that lists your and your spouse’s incomes, and all assets and liabilities. The more accurate financial information and back-up documentation you are able to provide to your attorney, the more likely you are to keep the cost of the divorce down and the faster your divorce can be brought to a conclusion.

1. What is a General Magistrate and can a General Magistrate be used in a divorce?
Many family law cases in Florida are referred to a general magistrate under Florida Family Law Rule of Procedure 12.490

A general magistrate is simply an attorney appointed by the Court with the power to (i) conduct a hearing and (ii) make a recommendation to the judge on how a particular pleading or issue should be ruled on. General magistrates keep the keep the family law system moving by taking some of the load off of the judges’ busy schedules. In
Hillsborough County, general magistrates are most commonly utilized in post-judgment cases (e.g., modification of a child support or alimony order). They form a rapidly growing specialized court for family law. Florida funds family general magistrates and hearing officers to provide faster court access for family disputes, relieve demands on judges’ case loads, and save judiciary expenses.

2. What are some of the most important factors in choosing a Tampa divorce attorney?
When determining your choice of an attorney it is best to go to the attorney’s or law firm’s website to obtain information on the attorney and the firm. It’s important that the attorney limits his or her practice to the area of law for which you need an attorney. Furthermore, the years of experience may be helpful; however, they are not determinative as to the capability of the lawyer.

One of the best factors to look at are the attorney or law firm’s reviews by clients and endorsements by peer attorneys. You will want to look for an attorney and law firm which are responsive to your questions. Furthermore, a factor to look at is how much the attorney charges, although it is better to pay more for an excellent lawyer and firm who will represent you zealously. Getting a divorce or any other family matter will affect the rest of your life. You need to make sure that you are well represented by lawyers who care and will give you the best representation possible.

3. My spouse is controlling the time I spend with my children. What can I do about it?
Both parties should be able to spend time with the children. If your spouse is controlling the time you spend with your children, then what you can do about it depends on your type of case. If you have filed for divorce or paternity then unfortunately, there is nothing that can be done about this until you both either come to a written signed agreement or attend mediation and attempt to come to an agreement on a timesharing schedule. Only after mediation has been completed, can the issue of timesharing be heard by the judge. It is best to come to an agreement between yourselves as otherwise you will have the visitation schedule determined by the judge and you will have to follow it.

If there is an order on visitation and the other parent is not following the order on a regular basis, then you can file a motion to enforce the agreement. The judge may agree with you and order that you receive make up visitation or additional visitation based on the circumstances.

4. What is alimony, how is it determined and can it be modified after the divorce?
Alimony is the monetary support paid from one spouse to the other following a dissolution of marriage. The purpose of alimony is to financially support the economically weaker spouse. Alimony is generally awarded on a “need and ability to pay.” This means that the spouse asking for alimony must show a need for the financial support; and show that the other spouse has the actual ability to pay that amount.

Alimony is determined on a case by case basis in Florida and varies with the particular judge that is hearing the case. This means there is no “standard” to calculate what alimony might be and that seemingly similar situations can have very different results regarding alimony. Florida Statute 61.08 helps the court to determine alimony by giving a list of factors to consider in calculating it.

There are 5 types of alimony; permanent periodic alimony, lump sum alimony, durational alimony, rehabilitative alimony and bridge the gap alimony. Permanent periodic alimony is generally awarded for long term marriages, which are marriages lasting longer than 15 years. This is not always the case, however, and should be taken on a case by case basis.

Lump sum alimony is exactly what it sounds like, one large payment. This is appropriate when smaller payments are not practical.

Durational alimony is awarded in a short to medium length marriage. It can last as little as a couple of years, but not exceeding the length of the marriage.

Rehabilitative alimony is intended for a specific purpose, over a definitive amount of time to allow a spouse the opportunity to obtain the necessary skills, education or training in the workforce in order to become self supporting. This type of alimony may be awarded in a short-term marriage where one spouse has stayed home to take care of the children and needs education or training to re-enter the work force.

Bridge the gap alimony is awarded in shorter length marriages and is designed to help adjust the transition of one spouse from being married to single. A spouse may need time to get a job or money to establish a new residence. This is more common in a short-term marriages where one spouse makes more than the other.

Alimony is modified or terminated due to a change in circumstances such as a supportive relationship, or if one party passes away, or remarries.

5. How is child support calculated and can I modify it after divorce?
Child support in Florida is determined by statute using the Florida Child Support Guidelines Worksheet, which must be completed before the divorce or paternity is final. Child support is calculated based upon the net income of both parties, the number of children, and the number of overnights each parent has with the children per year. Net income is after all taxes are deducted as well as alimony and child support paid to another person are deducted. If one or both of the parents are not currently working, then his or her net income is imputed by what he or she is capable of earning based upon, for example, prior earnings or profession and degree. If profession and degree, then the income would be determined by what others in the community with these qualifications are earning. In addition, day care and health insurance may be included in the calculation.

Child support can be modified either higher or lower after the divorce is final if there is a permanent, unanticipated and substantial change in circumstances. Section 61.30 (1)(b) of the Florida Statutes states as follows: “The guidelines may provide the basis for proving a substantial change in circumstances upon which a modification of an existing order may be granted. However, the difference between the existing monthly obligation and the amount provided for under the guidelines shall be at least 15 percent or $50, whichever amount is greater, before the court may find that the guidelines provide a substantial change in circumstances.” Furthermore, the change of income must be involuntary. In other words, one parent may not quit a job making X amount of money and taking another job earning less.

6. What can I do if the other party is not complying with the final judgment
If a party is not complying with the final judgment, then a Motion to Enforce the final judgment can be entered against the non-compliant party. This is like a warning from the court that the delinquent party needs to begin abiding by the judgment. If the party continues to not comply, then that party can be held in contempt. In Florida, there are several ways to enforce a contempt order including fines, suspension of driver’s licence, suspension of professional license, or even jail time.

7. How long does the divorce process take and what is the process?
The length of a divorce depends on the issues in the case as each case is different. If the parties to the dissolution of marriage can come to an agreement regarding all the issues present in their matter your case may be expedited. In an uncontested dissolution of marriage matter the parties will enter into a signed settlement agreement resolving all of the issues in their case and the agreement would be filed with the Petition for Dissolution of Marriage. Thereafter an Uncontested Final hearing will be scheduled on the first available date based on the Judge’s calendar.

The parties may also attempt to settle their case during the litigation and this should expedite the process as well. Typically parties are ordered to mediation by the Judge in dissolution of marriage matters. Mediation is an informal procedure in which the parties attempt to come to an agreement on all or some of the issues in their case.

Ultimately if the parties cannot come to an agreement on all of the issues in their case the matter will go to trial and the Judge will decide all of the contested issues. A fully litigated case could take anywhere from 6 months to a year or more depending on the issues. Each case is different and therefore the length of your case will depend on your specific issues and goals.

8. How can I relocate with the children before or after the divorce?
Parties to a divorce may not relocate with the minor children without either the other party’s consent or a Court order allowing such relocation. Florida Statute 61.13001 dictates the procedures for relocation with minor children. “Relocation” means a change in the location of the principal residence of a parent or other person from his or her principal place of residence at the time of the last order establishing or modifying time-sharing, or at the time of filing the pending action to establish or modify time-sharing. The change of location must be at least 50 miles from that residence, and for at least 60 consecutive days not including a temporary absence from the principal residence for purposes of vacation, education, or the provision of health care for the child.

If you and your spouse or other person entitled to access to or timesharing with the child come to an agreement for relocation the following provisions must be in the written agreement according to Florida Statute:

Consent to the relocation.
A defined access or time-sharing schedule for the nonrelocating parent and any other persons who are entitled to access or time-sharing; and
If necessary a description of any transportation arrangements related to access or time-sharing.
If you and your spouse or other person entitled to timesharing with the child do not agree to the relocation you must petition the Court for relocation and the petition must be signed under oath or affirmation under penalty or perjury. Florida statute also dictates what must be included in the Petition. In short, unless you and your spouse enter into a written agreement for the relocation or you get a court order granting such relocation you will be unable to relocate with the child.

9. What if you are a victim of or are in imminent fear of domestic violence?
If you are either a victim of domestic violence or you have a reasonable fear to believe that you are in imminent fear of becoming a victim of domestic violence pursuant to Florida Statute 741.30 you may file a Petition for Injunction for Protection. After the Petition is filed you should contact the clerk’s office to see if the temporary ex parte injunction was granted and if so, you should pick up a copy and keep it with you. A copy of the temporary injunction will also need to be served on the Respondent. Once a temporary injunction is ordered the Judge will set a return hearing in which the parties will have the opportunity to present witnesses and evidence. After you file the Petition the Judge may also deny the petition or set a hearing without a temporary injunction being ordered.

At the hearing on the Petition for Injunction for Protection, the Petitioner has the burden of proof to show that he/she has been or is in fear of becoming a victim of domestic violence. If the Petitioner meets the burden of proof the Judge will enter a Final Judgment of Injunction for Protection Against Domestic Violence and such injunction will explain specifically the terms of the Injunction. The Judge may indicate in the Final Judgment the length of time that the Injunction will be in full force and effect, that there is no contact between the parties, restrict locations that the Respondent may go to, order that the Respondent must surrender firearms and ammunition, order evaluation and counseling for the Respondent, temporary exclusive use of a residence, a temporary parenting plan and temporary support.

It is important that you specify all allegations in your Petition. Furthermore you should assure that you request all relief that is applicable in your matter and file any necessary documents required for such relief.

10. What is mediation and will I have to go to it if I know we cannot settle at it?
Parties are typically required to attend mediation prior to temporary relief hearings and trial. Mediation is a beneficial tool in every case even in cases that you may consider highly contested. It gives the parties the opportunity to discuss the issues and attempt to resolve all or some of the issues in the case. In Hillsborough County you have the option of either attending mediation at the Courthouse with Family Diversion services or you may opt to do a private mediation. Mediation with Family Diversion services in Hillsborough County is typically limited to 2 hours and the fee is a flat fee per party. In Pinellas County Court-provided mediation will be available in family cases when referred by the presiding judge or automatically referred by an Administrative Order and the parties combined gross income is less than $100,000. Parties in family cases whose combined gross income is $100,000 or more are not eligible for court-provided mediation, but may still be ordered to mediation.

Private mediation typically does not have a time limitation but it is more costly as private mediators typically charge by the hour. All Family Law Group, P.A. has a list of preferred private mediators that the attorneys use. These private certified mediators are also family law attorneys and therefore are knowledgeable of the law. The mediators should not give you legal advice; however, their legal background is a useful tool in assisting the parties to work towards settling issues in their case.

11. How is timesharing between the parents determined if they don’t agree?
If parties do not agree to a timesharing schedule and/or parenting plan then the issue will ultimately be determined by the Judge at a hearing and/or trial. Either party may Motion the Court for temporary relief including a request for a temporary timesharing schedule before trial. Keep in mind that in Hillsborough County the Judges typically require mediation prior to temporary relief hearings. When the Court is faced with the issues regarding minor children, the Court will evaluate best interest of the child standard as outlined in the Florida Statutes Section 61.13(2)(a).

12. How are assets and debts usually divided in a divorce?
Pursuant to Florida Family Law Rules of Civil Procedure, within forty five days of the Respondent being served with the Initial Petition for Dissolution of Marriage both parties must complete financial affidavits and Mandatory Disclosure. Mandatory Disclosure may be waived in writing by both parties, however, it would not be advisable if you are uncertain or do not have full and frank disclosure of the other parties’ income, assets and debts. The mandatory disclosure and financial affidavits are good discovery tools to begin an analysis on dividing assets and debts in a dissolution of marriage proceeding.

Our first step in analyzing a distribution of assets and debts is to determine if the asset and debt is marital or non marital. There are many factors to analyze when making such determination such as the date of filing the Petition for Dissolution of Marriage, agreements between the parties, agreed upon dates of separation and if Florida Statute defines a certain asset or debt to be non marital based on the circumstances. After such determination we analyze how to value the marital asset or debt and what date of valuation you want to argue for at the final hearing. The Judge may determine that different dates or the same date for valuation of assets and debts should be used based on if the date is just and equitable under the circumstances. The Court will begin with the premise that the distribution of marital assets and debts should be equal, however, there may be relevant factors in your case to justify an unequal distribution as defined in Florida Statutes Section 61.075

Divorce is a painful and difficult experience. If you understand the functions and limitations of the Florida legal system, the process becomes more tolerable. This should provide you with a greater understanding of the process to help you get through your divorce with realistic ideas and goals.

Limitations
Florida’s divorce system is based on the principle of “no-fault,” meaning that a divorce will be granted if either party believes that the marriage is over. Generally, the causes of the failure of the marriage are not an issue in court. All that matters is that the marriage needs to be ended.

It is impossible for any court to heal the emotional wounds created by your divorce. You must understand that the legal system is not a tool for punishment of your spouse. The courtroom is no place for revenge. The court must decide your case on the basis of its unique facts. In most cases, the law does not permit the court to compensate either of you for the other’s misconduct.

Please do your best to keep emotions out of the case. Your feelings of anger, pain, and betrayal are understandable, but expressing them inappropriately in court may interfere with your ability to provide the court with the information the court needs.

Settlement
The best way to conclude your case is to settle it. Through compromise and cooperation, a settlement can lead to greater mutual satisfaction and lessened animosity between you and your spouse. In most cases, negotiations toward settlement can be more productive and far less expensive than a trial.

If negotiations fail and you must try your case, the court will make rulings that will permanently affect you and your children. The court’s rulings must be made exclusively upon the limited evidence that is presented in court, and nothing else. Because the court is restricted in what the court can and cannot do, a settlement can offer a wider range of options.

Variations
Every divorce is different. Your results may be very different from your neighbor’s, friend’s, or relative’s. You cannot rely upon what happened in their cases and assume that your results will be the same. Cases that seem similar may, in fact, be very different and will be treated differently under the law. For this reason, you should look to your lawyer for your legal advice and information. Your friends and relatives usually do not have a grasp of the law and your case, and accepting their advice may hinder you in the long run.

Finances
Unless you settle your case, the court must allocate the income and assets accumulated during the marriage. The law is that you and your spouse were financial partners during the marriage and are presumed entitled to share in both the assets and income the partnership made.

For most people, lifestyles change after a divorce. Since divorces do not create property or income, the court must divide the marital resources between two separate households. It costs more to run two households than one. If you or your spouse has not been employed during the marriage, it may be necessary to seek employment.

In considering a settlement, you should consider whether you can afford the attorney’s fees to fully litigate your case. Fees and costs in contested cases can be quite high. Usually, a settlement prior to trial reduces the expenses considerably, an important consideration if you come to the divorce with limited resources.

Issues
A divorce in Florida generally involves four major issues: child custody/visitation, child support [Leesburg FL Child Support & Child Custody Attorney Services], alimony, and a division of property/debts. The court may also be asked to enter an order (called an injunction) prohibiting or requiring certain actions. After the case is concluded, the court may later be asked to modify custody and/or support. You need to understand each of these aspects of your case.

Divorce & Child Custody
Most parents will share parental responsibility for their children after the divorce in Florida. In doing so, you must communicate and confer with each other in making decisions that will affect your children.

Usually, the court will give one parent majority time-sharing (custody) of the children. Unless there is a good reason, the court will grant the other parent liberal and frequent time-sharing (visitation). Determining the majority time-sharing (custody), the court will give great weight to the issue of which of you is more likely to encourage the children to visit the other. In some cases, the court may award equal time-sharing (rotating custody) where the children spend an equal amount of time with both parents.

The court decides custody solely on what is best for the children. Often, one of the parties is hurt by the decision, especially if that party sees the decision in a “win/lose” light. In truth, there can be no loser if the children’s welfare is protected.

In virtually all custody contests, the court will direct both parties to participate mediation to resolve that issue. A mediator is an unbiased third party who can often assist the parties in reaching agreement upon what is best for the children. An agreement on custody will certainly make your case easier and help your children immeasurably in dealing with your divorce.

Divorce & Child Support
Aside from continuing to love your children and seeing them often, you have no higher obligation as a parent than to continue supporting your children after the divorce. Child support is more important than any other debt or financial obligation. Both parents are required to support the children, but the minority time-sharer (non-residential/non-custodial parent) will be directed to pay his/her portion of the support to the other. This does not mean that the majority time-sharer (residential parent) is not contributing to the support. Florida has adopted guidelines for child support that the court is required to follow. Your friends and relatives may have been involved in divorces years ago or in other states and receive or pay lower support than our guidelines provide. The child support in your case will be based upon your income, your spouse’s income, the amount of overnight time-sharing (visitation) and the needs of your children under the guidelines established by the State. If equal time-sharing (rotating custody) is ordered, child support is significantly reduced.

Alimony
The court finds it necessary to award alimony, or spousal support, in many cases. As with child support, the court will consider two factors: one party’s need and the other’s ability to pay. Both of these factors must be proven in court by the requesting spouse. Alimony may be awarded to either a husband or wife and, depending on the length of the marriage and other factors, the alimony may be permanent or for only a short duration.

Property Division
Under Florida law, the court must try to make an “equitable distribution” of marital property and debts. “Equitable” does not always mean “equal,” although that is the starting point. Many factors, including child support, custody, and alimony awards, can cause the court to make an unequal (but still equitable) division of property. The court will not generally divide the property and debts that arise outside the marriage.

Injunctions
If needed, the court can order you or your spouse to do, or not do, certain things. The court may order a party not to telephone the other, not to come to the other’s place of business, not to interfere in the other’s activities, and the like.

Attorney's Fees
The court can order one party to pay some or all of the other’s attorney’s fees. The court does this to assure that both parties have equal access to competent counsel The court does not award fees in every case; the court must first find that one party has a greater ability to pay than the other. You cannot ever be certain that the court will award fees. For this reason, and because of the great drain that fees can be on marital assets, everyone (parties and attorneys alike) should make every effort to resolve a divorce case as economically as possible.

Do's and Don'ts
There are some rather clear cut rules that apply to every divorce. Pay heed to these rules and your divorce will be easier and less painful for all involved.

Have Reasonable Expectations. You will certainly be disappointed if you expect to “win” on every issue. Rarely is either party happy about every ruling in a case. Even the best rulingsleave both parties somewhat dissatisfied. Encourage your attorney to give you a realistic projection of the outcome of your case.

Keep Communication Open with Your Spouse/Ex-Spouse. As long as you have children, you and your (ex)spouse will have to work together. Your children will suffer to the degree that you and your former spouse cannot cooperate and communicate.

Get Professional Help to Deal with Your Emotions. If you have trouble with the hostility, anger, or depression that often occurs in divorces, don’t hesitate to get counseling to help you through it. Use professional help to deal with your hostility. Don’t use the court, your attorney, or the system to vent your anger; that would be counterproductive. A good counselor can help you, and your children, get through this difficult time.

Encourage and Support Visitation. If you are the custodial parent, you have a duty to encourage visitation. You must do more than just stay out of the way or leave the choice to the children. Encourage your children to see your former spouse frequently and to enjoy the contact. Never use support or visitation as a lever or bargaining chip in dealing with the other parent.

Give Your Children a Chance. The way you and your spouse handle your divorce will have an enormous impact upon your children. If you argue and fight, their problems and pain will be magnified. By acting civilly, you can help them through one of the most difficult events of their lives.